DEAREST WOMYN OF COLOR
Rosie Brown*
Dearest womyn of color,
For me, it was incredibly painful to hear the harrowing testimony of Dr. Blasey Ford and the news stories of other women
speaking about their traumatic memories of assaults by a man who
had achieved all the markers of a successful American life. The
predictability of the situation—from the description of Kavanaugh’s actions, to the reactions in the media and political arena—felt
like an affirmation of what I already knew: women are devalued in
this country. Not only that, but if a white woman with a pedigree
like Dr. Blasey Ford is discounted and ignored, what of a nonwhite woman, or someone who is nonbinary or trans*? As much
as the media attempted to make analogies to Anita Hill, they were
quick to point out that this time was “different.” Was it different
because of the #MeToo movement (founded by black female activist Tarana Burke), or was it different because of the races of the
people concerned?
In any case, this was a moment of mourning and of action. I
was reminded of the phrase from Audre Lorde’s A Burst of Light,
“caring for myself is not self-indulgence, it is self-preservation, and
that is an act of political warfare.”1
The Womyn of Color Collective at UCLA School of Law recognized that we must care for ourselves and for each other. We
cohosted an open space to talk with faculty and therapists available in the Public Interest Law and Policy courtyard; and I hosted a
potluck brunch at my home. We sent quotes from women of color
to our members to lend strength and inspire hope, and to remind
our community that we are powerful, and we are enough. We will
continue to support each other, to have spaces where we can be
ourselves and be together, and continue our self-preservation.

*
Rosie Brown is a Juris Doctor and Masters of Public Policy candidate
at UCLA with an expected graduation of 2021, and she received her Bachelor
of Arts from the University of Pennsylvania in 2012. She has a long history with
the labor movement, advocating for low-wage immigrant workers; and she is
particularly interested in the future of work in the age of Big Data.
1. Audre Lorde, A Burst of Light and Other Essays 131 (1988).

© 2019 Rosie Brown. All rights reserved.

35

36

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

Vol. 26.35

There are opportunities even in the most difficult moments.
—Wangari Maathai2
there are far too many mouths here
but not enough of them are worth
what you’re offering
give yourself to a few
and to those few
give heavily
- invest in the right people
—rupi kaur3
Though we tremble before uncertain futures
may we meet illness, death and adversity with strength
may we dance in the face of our fears.
—Gloria Anzaldúa4
 ou have to act as if it were possible to radically transform the
Y
world. And you have to do it all the time.
—Angela Davis5
With love,
Rosie Brown
Womyn of Color Collective co-chair

2. Wangari Maathai, Unbowed: A Memoir 144 (2006).
3. rupi kaur, the sun and her flowers 205 (2017).
4. Gloria E. Anzaldúa, now let us shift . . . the path of conocimiento . . . ­inner work, public acts, in This Bridge We Call Home: Radical Visions
for Transformation 575 (Gloria E. Anzaldúa & AnaLouise Keating eds.,
2002).
5. James Anderson, Angela Davis talk at SIUC on Feb. 13, 2014, YouTube
(Feb. 16, 2014), https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6s8QCucFADc&t=943s.

