ARTICLES
GENDER MAINSTREAMING IN THE
UNITED STATES:
A New Vision of Equality

Melissa Bellitto*
Abstract
In the United States gender equality cases in front of the Supreme Court, State and Congressional legislation, and decisions by
other United States courts have been decided by applying formal
equality. This view of equality combined with the United States’
“Negative Constitution” has led to extremely unjust gender equality
rulings. At the same time, the increased influence of international
human rights law means the United States can no longer ignore gender equality at home while preaching human rights abroad. Gender
mainstreaming offers a way of looking at gender equality that would
satisfy both international norms and the “Negative Constitution.”
Introduction
Gender mainstreaming is defined as,
The process of assessing the implications for women and
men of any planned action, including legislation, policies or programmes, in all areas and at all levels. It is a
strategy of making women’s as well as men’s concerns
and experiences an integral dimension of the design,
implementation, monitoring and evaluation of policies
and programmes in all political, economic and societal
spheres so that women and men benefit equally and inequality is not perpetuated.1
* LL.M, Gender and the Law, American University Washington College of
Law August 2014, LLM. International Human Rights, City University, London
2007, LL.B (Hons) City University, London, 2006
1
Rachael L. Johnstone, Feminist Influences on the United Nations Human Rights Treaty Bodies, 28 Hum. Rts. Q. 148, 156 (2006) (citing Report of the
© 2015 Melissa Bellitto. All rights reserved.

125

126

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.125

UN Women had this to say about gender mainstreaming,
“Gender mainstreaming does not entail developing separate women’s projects within work programmes, or even women’s components within existing activities in the work programmes. It requires
that attention is given to gender perspectives as an integral part
of all activities across all programmes.”2 Legal scholars and women’s rights advocates have been examining how ratifying The Convention to Eliminate All Forms of Discrimination Against Women
(“CEDAW”) would improve the lives of United States women. The
UN General Assembly adopted CEDAW in 19793 and President
Carter signed it in 1980, but it was never ratified. To date, the United States is one of seven countries that has not ratified CEDAW.4
Gender mainstreaming is an action that could be taken right
now to improve the lives of men and women in the United States
without detracting from advocating the ratifying of CEDAW or
passing the Equal Rights Amendment (“ERA”). Alice Paul wrote
the ERA in 1923. It was introduced at every Congress from 19231972, until it was finally passed and sent to the states for ratification.
The seven-year period for ratification was extended, but in 1982,
only thirty-five out of the thirty-eight states needed had ratified.
To date the ERA has still not been ratified.5 The ERA has three
sections. It reads, “Section 1 Equality of rights under law shall not
be denied or abridged by the United States or any state on account
of sex. Section 2-The Congress shall have the power to enforce,
by legislation, the provisions of this article, Section 3 The Amendment shall take effect two years after ratification.”6 While passage
of CEDAW would clearly improve lives, ratification is not likely to
happen anytime soon. On the other hand, the implementation of
gender mainstreaming does not require signing or ratifying treaties. Rather, all gender mainstreaming requires is for lawmakers
and courts to think about how a law or policy will affect both men
and women.
Economic and Social Council for 1997, U.N. GAOR, 52nd Sess., Supp No. 3,
U.N. Doc A/52/3/Rev.1, at 24 (1997)).
2
U.N. Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and the Advancement of Women, Important Concepts Underlying Gender Mainstreaming (Aug.
2001), http://www.un.org/womenwatch/osagi/pdf/factsheet2.pdf.
3
U.N. Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women,
Short History of CEDAW Convention, http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/
cedaw/history.htm (last visited Mar. 20, 2015).
4
Feminist Majority Found, Global Women’s Rights: CEDAW, http://www.
feminist.org/Global/cedaw.html (last visited Mar. 20, 2015).
5
Equal Rights Amendment, http://www.equalrightsamendment.org (last
visited Mar. 20, 2015).
6
Id.

2015]

Gender Mainstreaming

127

Gender mainstreaming would also not fundamentally change
the Negative Constitution. Gender mainstreaming does not require
a government to engage in a positive obligation to promote equality. If a “negative rights” Constitutional interpretation dictates that
the government has to refrain from passing laws that harm certain
citizens at the expense of others, then gender mainstreaming fits
perfectly into this scheme, as it does not require the government
to harm any citizen. If gender mainstreaming is implemented, the
government will not be required to provide anyone with anything,
but rather, it will be required to look at how “ women and men benefit equally and inequality is not perpetuated” by a law or policy.7
This paper looks at how the United States can no longer ignore international human rights norms regarding equality between
men and women. I start with the idea that gender mainstreaming
is the process by which to start a conversation about gender in the
United States that will survive constitutional scrutiny. I analyze
federalism and how gender mainstreaming is the answer to a court
that is increasingly applying a narrow view of federalism to civil
rights cases. I also analyze formal and substantial equality, and how
gender mainstreaming applies the substantial equality perspective
that has not been applied very often by courts in the United States.
I look at how gender mainstreaming has been applied in Europe,
with an emphasis on Germany, since it has a similar federal/state
division of power. Lastly, I look at how gender mainstreaming principles and human rights have already been applied in various localities in the United States, and how a wider implementation can
fundamentally change the conversation about women’s rights in the
United States.
The challenge in the United States is its strong resistance to
providing equal economic and social rights to women. There are
many reasons for this. The most paramount is Cold War politics
and the fear that making the government responsible for economic
and social rights would lead to communism.8 Other reasons are
the highly individualistic tendencies in United States culture and
the belief that social programmes are for the poor and therefore
are not supported by the middle class.9 Because of this resistance
the United States is a standout among all nations in its hostility
toward ensuring that all people are able to live lives consistent with
Johnstone, supra note 1, at 156.
Catherine Albisa, Economic and Social Rights in the United States: Six
Rights, One Promise, in Bringing Human Rights Home Vol. 2, 25 (Cynthia
Soohoo, Catherine Albisa & Martha F. Davis eds., 2008).
9
Id at 27.
7
8

128

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.125

human dignity, freedom, and equality. Despite strides forward in
equality based on race and sexual orientation, this hostility to social
and economic rights between genders is what holds back women’s
equality. It is also why I am being careful to not frame gender mainstreaming as an economic and social issue.
The 1993 Vienna Conference was a watershed moment in
women’s human rights. The achievement was two-fold: 1) it provided for the recognition of violence against women as a human
rights issue; and 2) set into motion the process of integrating or
“mainstreaming” issues of women’s rights and gender equality into
the international system at all levels.11 Gender violence is per se
gender discrimination. Gender violence is viewed as inherently discriminatory in that it both reflects inequality and perpetuates it.12
Seeing gender violence as universally discriminatory and not
dependent on a showing that a state inflicted the violence causes a
state to have positive obligations under the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights (“ICCPR”) to attempt to combat the
violence. The international human rights system imposes positive
obligations as well as negative responsibilities.13 The United States
constitutional system is strictly a negative responsibility system.
This means that claims that the state is responsible for failing to
protect, prevent, or punish have no force.14 Under the negative responsibility theory all a state has to do is to avoid harming a person. The United States has signed and ratified the ICCPR which
provides for two types of positive state responsibility: 1) the duty
to respect (negative) or do no harm, and 2) the duty to ensure the
protection of these rights against private interference as well as a
duty to provide the means means to exercise basic rights.15 Under
the ICCPR the United States has a duty to provide appropriate
remedies for gender violence, including judicial remedies.16 However, as will be demonstrated in the remainder of this paper, the
10

Id.
Rhonda Copelon, International Human Rights Dimensions of Intimate
Violence: Another Strand in the Dialectic of Feminist Lawmaking, 11 Am. U.J.
Gender Soc. Pol’y & L. 865, 867 (2003).
12
Id. at 869.
13
Id. at 872.
14
See Deshaney v. Winnebago County Dep’t of Social Services, 489 U.S. 189
(1989). The Supreme Court articulated this view in DeShaney, where it denied
redress for the State’s knowing failure to protect a child from his father’s violence. See also Town of Castle Rock v. Gonzales, 545 U.S. 748 (2005) (holding
that the local police department had no obligation to enforce a civil domestic
protection order).
15
Copelon, supra note 11, at 872.
16
Id. at 873.
10
11

2015]

Gender Mainstreaming

129

United States has failed in its duty under the ICCPR to provide an
adequate remedy for gender-based violence.
After the Beijing Conference, gender mainstreaming was
co-opted into the policies of several development organizations.17
This is still where gender mainstreaming has gained the most traction. Gender mainstreaming is now the central goal of international development efforts.18 The Vienna Convention’s mandate to
mainstream gender in human rights systems is an equally important
tool for both nations and local activists.19 The Beijing Platform for
Action obligates state signatories as well as international organizations to mainstream gender.20 Gender mainstreaming quickly
becomes marginalized when separated from the human rights mandate. The positive obligation of gender mainstreaming that calls
for a systematic approach is at odds with our Negative Constitution
approach. The focus of gender mainstreaming by advocates in the
United States focuses on enacting CEDAW on a state or local basis.21 Despite the centrality of mainstreaming in international endeavors there is still skepticism about its effectiveness in promoting
gender equality and empowering women.22 Gender mainstreaming
is difficult to measure. It is also difficult to fully implement without
social, cultural, and economic changes. Despite these potential pitfalls, I present gender mainstreaming as a tool that women’s rights
advocates can use to bring gender and gender issues to the forefront in legislation and policy-making.
In 1994 the United States Congress passed the Violence
Against Women Act (“VAWA”). One of the landmark provisions
was the civil rights provision. This provision provided a legal remedy for victims of gender-based violence. It placed violence against
women under the umbrella law of sex discrimination. It recognized
that violence against women is gender based.23 By identifying gender-based violence as a civil right, it freed survivors from the stigmatic standards of criminal and tort law. It also allowed survivors to
initiate and control their own litigation.24 This provision was based
on research showing that state responses to gender violence were
17
Jinn Winn Chong, The Politics of the Empowerment of Women: Mapping
Enabling Environments Within Narratives of Femininity and Power, 18 Wm. &
Mary J. Women & L. 523, 529-30 (2011-2012).
18
Id. at 529.
19
Copelon, supra note 11, at 874.
20
Chong, supra note 17, at 529.
21
Copelon, supra note 11, at 874-75.
22
Chong, supra note 17, at 530.
23
Catherine A. MacKinnon, Disputing Male Sovereignty: On United States
v. Morrison, 114 Harv. L. Rev. 135, 138 (2000) [hereinafter MacKinnon 2000].
24
Id. at 138.

130

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.125

inadequate and that gender violence cost the United States economy millions of dollars per year. In the 2000 case, United States v.
Morrison,25 the Supreme Court struck down the civil rights provision of VAWA under both the commerce clause and a narrow view
of states rights. The Supreme Court saw violence against women as
a non- economic and local issue, thereby making it constitutionally
inappropriate for a federal court.26 In doing this, the Court went
against the very wishes of the states whose rights they were proposing to protect as well as the wishes of Congress and the American
People. This provision left United States women with no civil legal
remedy for gender-based violence.
The Convention on The Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women (“CEDAW”)
In recent years, advocacy around women’s rights in the United States has centered upon United States ratification of CEDAW.
However, the question must be asked about whether ratifying CEDAW would really do anything to eliminate discrimination against
women in the United States.27 The Reservations, Understandings,
and Declarations (“RUDS”) formulated during the Clinton administration would make the treaty meaningless.28 Entering RUDS
into a treaty allows a country to ratify a treaty without being bound
by the specific provision to which they have attached a RUD. Article 19 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties allows
for Reservations unless the treaty specifically prohibits them, the
treaty stipulates that only certain RUDs may be made, or the RUD
conflicts with the “object and purpose of the treaty.”29 A state may
make a Declaration about its understanding about a specific provision of the treaty. Treaties allow for optional or mandatory Declarations. They are legally binding. For instance, United States RUDs
reflected the United States fear that CEDAW would infringe on
the sovereignty of the United States and promote a “radical agenda” that would undermine traditional family values such as marriage and motherhood.30 CEDAW “calls for Parties to eliminate
discrimination against women in all areas of life, including health
care, education employment, domestic relations, law, commercial
United States v. Morrison, 529 U.S. 598 (2000).
MacKinnon 2000, supra note 23, at 139.
27
Ann M. Piccard, U.S. Ratification of CEDAW: From Bad to Worse?, 28
Law & Ineq. 119, 121 (2010).
28
Id. at 121.
29
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, art. 19, May 23, 1969, 1155
U.N.T.S. 331.
30
Piccard, supra note 27, at 136.
25
26

2015]

Gender Mainstreaming

131

transactions, and political participation.” Compare this with the
language of gender mainstreaming which calls for “[t]he process of
assessing the implications for women and men of any planned action, including legislation, policies or programmes, in all areas and
at all levels.”32 Unlike CEDAW, the focus of gender mainstreaming
is equality not discrimination. It also focuses on men and not just
women. It does not instruct a state on which areas they must apply
gender mainstreaming to. Rather, it gives states the freedom to
apply gender mainstreaming as they wish, without an international
body looking over their shoulder. This alone would make mainstreaming more palatable and doable in the United States. Most
importantly of all, implementing gender mainstreaming does not
require signing or ratifying a treaty. It only requires advocates and
politicians to have the political will to implement it.
Furthermore, Ann Piccard points out that it is not clear how
exactly the ratification of CEDAW would help women.33 She gives
the example of the need for safe, affordable childcare. Nothing in
the United States Constitution recognizes this need for childcare
as a right. Even if under CEDAW, domestic courts had to honor
the United States’ international obligations, it is still unclear where
this right to childcare would be found.34 Ratifying CEDAW would
not change the negative rights characteristic of our legal culture.
The United States Constitution is designed to prevent the government from acting in a negative way. As the Constitution does not
require a positive action in this sphere, there is no affirmative right
to childcare. Gender mainstreaming, however, could provide this
framework. Mainstreaming could change our fundamental cultural view of a Negative Rights Constitution, but it does not have to.
The beauty of gender mainstreaming is that it can be applied at
every level. A state, municipality, or even a corporation can implement gender-mainstreaming principles to provide safe, affordable
childcare. Remembering the definition of gender mainstreaming
as, “[a] process of assessing the implications for women and men of
any planned action, including legislation, policies or programs, in all
areas and at all levels[,]” then providing safe, affordable childcare
becomes apparent. Approaching childcare through a gender-mainstreaming lens means looking at how safe, affordable childcare improves the lives of both women and men. It also requires looking at
the implications for men and women of a lack of childcare. Instead
31

31
32
33
34

Id. at 126.
Johnstone, supra note 1, at 156.
Piccard, supra note 27, at 141.
Id. at 141.

132

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.125

of childcare being only a women’s issue by gender mainstreaming,
policy makers must look at the cost of childcare, the economic implications of not having childcare, and how these issues affect both
men and women. Also, asking how legislation and policy affects
women and men opens the door for a conversation about how the
lack of safe, affordable childcare affects fathers as well as mothers.
This is a conversation that would not occur under CEDAW. Many
of the countries that have ratified CEDAW have inserted RUDs
that make the treaty ineffective and thus unable to really improve
the lives of women. Some countries probably signed these RUDs
because of international pressure. By contrast, once it is implemented, a gender mainstreaming perspective does not allow for a
work around. Gender mainstreaming is thus only implemented by
those with a clear commitment to women’s equality.
Equal Protection
Reed v. Reed is the case that established that equal protection under the Fourteenth Amendment applies to women. Reed
set a precedent. Cases since have reaffirmed that the equal protection clause provides heightened scrutiny to laws that discriminate
against women.36 Though Reed was decided unanimously, none
of the gender equality cases from 1971-2001 were decided without dissent. Many of the dissents have been based on an Originalist interpretation of the Constitution. This idea comes from the
belief that the language of the Fourteenth Amendment does not
endorse an open-ended view of liberty, equality, or any other concept.37 This view is particularly strong with regard to the Equal Protection Clause. Originalists believe that the Constitution should
be interpreted based on the legal materials that were available to
those who drafted the original amendment.38 They believe that an
open-ended view of the Constitution leads to uncertainty and compromises government flexibility.39 To an Originalist, government
flexibility means the flexibility to not act. An Originalist sees an
open-ended constitutional interpretation as impinging on the Negative Constitution approach and thereby forcing the government to
act. This Originalist view of equal protection is the most dangerous
constitutional challenge to gender mainstreaming. However, the
35

404 U.S. 71, 76-77 (1971).
Twentieth Anniversary Edition, Panel Discussion: Reed v. Reed at 40:
Equal Protection and Women’s Rights, 20 Am. U. J. Gender Soc. Pol’y & L. 315,
321 (2011-2012).
37
Id. at 323.
38
Id.
39
Id. at 324.
35
36

2015]

Gender Mainstreaming

133

inclusion of men into the constitutional definition as well as legislation and policies means that gender mainstreaming may survive a
constitutional challenge.
Equal Protection And The Challenge of Federalism
Traditionally federalism has been about a limitation on national power in order to preserve a sphere of deference to the states.
This is in line with looking to the federal government as “the guarantor of basic federal rights against state power.”40 Sally Goldfarb
argues that there is a third vision of federalism that is a synthesis
of the other two. She calls it “cooperative rights federalism.”41 This
federalism recognizes that in some circumstances state’s rights and
individual’s rights are complementary rather then mutually exclusive, and federal legislation can enhance the rights of both states
and individuals.42 The civil rights provision of VAWA epitomized
this view of cooperative rights federalism.43 The VAWA civil rights
remedy was carefully devised to create a limited federal role while
preserving state autonomy.44 Despite this, the civil rights remedy of
VAWA was still struck down by the Supreme Court as a violation
of the principle of federalism.
Federalism was used to justify racism in the southern United
States until the passage of the Civil Rights Act. If the federal courts
were not concerned about federalism in their civil rights cases, then
why are they suddenly concerned about federalism and states rights
in the violence against women cases? As the Morrison case shows,
efforts to address women’s inequality have been met with arguments that something within United States’ federalism prohibits
national action.45 This was the approach governing the Morrison
decision. The majority held that Congress exceeded its constitutional powers when authorizing victims of violence, animated by
gender bias, to bring civil damage lawsuits against assailants in federal courts.46 Chief Justice Rehnquist believed such issues were for
the states writing, “The Constitution requires a distinction between
40
Sally F. Goldfarb, The Supreme Court, The Violence Against Women Act,
and the Use and Abuse of Federalism, 71 Fordham L. Rev. 57, 60 (2002) (quoting Mitchum v. Foster, 407 U.S. 225, 239 (1972)) [hereinafter Goldfarb 2002].
41
Id. at 61.
42
Id.
43
Id.
44
Id. at 78.
45
Judith Resnik, Federalism(s), Feminism, Families, and the Constitution,
in Women and the United States Constitution, History, Interpretation, and
Practice 127, 127 (Sibyl A. Schwarzenbach & Patricia Smith eds., 2003).
46
Id.

134

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.125

what is truly national and truly local.” Yet, when dealing with racial equality, the Supreme Court had no issue with a distinction between local and national.
Starting with Brown v. Board of Education,48 the Supreme
Court and Congress interpreted the Equal Protection Clause in
a manner that was attentive to evolving contested social norms.49
In the early 1960s, in Heart of Atlanta Motel v. United States,50 the
Supreme Court upheld the public accommodation provisions of
the Civil Rights Act on Commerce Clause grounds alone.51 The
Supreme Court held that by being on an interstate highway and
accepting visitors from around the nation, the motel moved in the
stream of commerce and therefore could not discriminate based on
race. This decision set a precedent of using the Commerce Clause
to challenge discriminatory practices. Yet in Morrison, the Supreme
Court held that the Commerce Clause could not sustain the federal
civil rights remedy created by VAWA.52 The Court found that the
remedy sought to assert federal judicial control over a “noneconomic activity” was within an area of state regulation.53 One could
easily make the point that who does or does not stay the night at
a hotel is also within the bounds of state regulation. Yet, when it
came to racial issues, the Supreme Court was willing to extend the
reach of the federal government to the states. They have so far
been unwilling to do so with gender equality.
When defeating the civil rights remedy of VAWA, the Court’s
majority discussed family and criminal law and decided that the
economic problems of violence against women fell within the
bounds of local crime and family, and thus was not subject to national governance.54 This was despite extensive findings that gender
violence affects women economically. Women take certain jobs and
avoid others because of concerns of gender violence.55 These findings were much more extensive than those the Supreme Court had
to work with in upholding the Civil Right Act in Heart of Atlanta.56
47

Id. (quoting U.S. v. Morrison, 529 U.S. 598, 617-18 (2000)).
Brown v. Bd. of Educ. of Topeka, Shawnee Cnty., Kan., 347 U.S. 483
(1954).
49
Robert C. Post & Reva B. Siegel, Equal Protection by Law: Federal Antidiscrimination Legislation After Morrison and Kimel, 110 Yale L.J. 441, 446
(2000).
50
Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. U. S., 379 U.S. 241 (1964).
51
Post & Siegel, supra note 49, at 447.
52
Id. at 449.
53
Id. at 449-50.
54
Resnik, supra note 45, at 132.
55
Id. at 131.
56
Post & Siegel, supra note 49, at 449.
47
48

2015]

Gender Mainstreaming

135

Sally Goldfarb says, “The Supreme Court’s simplistic view
that states must be allowed to regulate gender-motivated violence
(or not regulate it) as they see fit does injustice not only to women,
but to federalism.”57 Furthermore, even the contention that family
law is local and has no place in federal law does not hold water.
Congress and the Supreme Court have passed and upheld a myriad of laws to support and protect families. Federal child support
laws were enacted to support women and children.58 The Supreme
Court also understood that they had the power to speak about
families.59 From the 1920’s onward, the Supreme Court created a
body of federal law pertaining to families, including protecting legal
parents from state intervention and guaranteeing that parents have
various forms of control over their children, such as the direction of
their education.60 The Supreme Court also held on state marriage
laws, sexuality (banning race-based marriage, prohibiting polygamy,
and permitting contraception), and child custody.61 This line of cases shows that just because an area of law pertains to families, it has
not stopped the Supreme Court from issuing a ruling.
When looked at alone, Morrison looks like a court showing
willful blindness to the issue of gender based violence even when
confronted with mountains of evidence that it is occurring and is
harmful. Starting with the United States v. Lopez,62 decided in 1995,
the Supreme Court began limiting the broad reach of the Commerce Clause. This limitation came to fruition with Shelby County
v. Holder,63 decided in 2013. While the Commerce Clause was used
by the Supreme Court to prohibit racial discrimination, it is evident
that this court is not interested in using the Commerce Clause to
uphold women’s rights. When the decision in Morrison is looked
at in the context of Lopez64 and Shelby County,65 a body of cases develops that limits the Commerce Clause and increases state’s
rights. Considering that cases on discrimination, gender and racial
equality have been decided using either the Equal Protection or the
Goldfarb 2002, supra note 40, at 88.
Resnik, supra note 45, at 133.
59
Id. at 135.
60
Id. at 136 (citing Santoksy v. Kramer, 455 U.S. 745 (1982); Meyer v. Neb.,
262 U.S. 390, 401 (1923); Pierce v. Soc’y of the Sisters of the Holy Names of
Jesus and Mary, 268 U.S. 510, 534-35 (1925)).
61
Id. (citing Loving v. Va., 388 U.S. 1, 2 (1967); Reynolds v. U.S., 98 U.S. 145
(1878); Cleveland v. U.S., 329 U.S. 14 (1946); Eisenstadt v. Baird, 405 U.S. 438
(1972)).
62
U.S. v. Lopez, 514 U.S. 549 (1995).
63
Shelby Cnty., Ala. v. Holder, 133 U.S. 2612 (2013).
64
U.S. v. Lopez, 514 U.S. 549 (1995).
65
Shelby Cnty., Ala., 133 U.S. at 2612.
57
58

136

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.125

Due Process clauses of the Fourteenth or Fifth Amendments, and
considering that this court is circumscribing these arguments in favor of strong states rights, we must consider another remedy. While
one possible remedy may still be found in our Constitution, specifically in Article 9 or in the Privileges and Immunities Clause, I feel
the best way to deal with gender-based discrimination is through
gender mainstreaming. Mainstreaming can operate at the local and
state levels that the Supreme Court called for in Morrison. It also
does not require the passing of any new legislation, which could
then incur Constitutional challenge. Gender mainstreaming would
also bring U.S. law and thinking into line with international principles of gender equality.
Formal Versus Substantive Equality
Formal (also known as legal) equality requires that persons
who are in the same situation be accorded exactly the same treatment and that people should not be treated differently because of
arbitrary characteristics such as race, religion, or gender.66 The formal equality approach, which is what the United States takes, is not
so much concerned about equality of groups as about equality of
individuals.67 The focus of formal equality is on fairness. This approach fails to consider that in certain contexts these characteristics
are irrelevant and that same treatment does not necessarily result
in equitable treatment.68 On the other hand, substantive equality
looks at making sure laws or policies do not impose subordinating
treatment on groups already suffering social, political or economic
disadvantage. It recognizes that sameness of treatment can actually
perpetuate inequality and that in certain circumstances equality actually requires differential or preferential treatment.69 Substantive
equality asks what is the substance of the inequality and do the
facts fit that substance?70 The key case in which the Supreme Court
failed to recognize the substance of gender inequality is Town of
Castle Rock v. Gonzales.71 In this case, Jessica Gonzales made numerous phone calls to the Castle Rock police department to enforce
her civil protection order against her ex-husband. Her ex-husband
66
Anne Smith & Eithne McLaughlin, Delivering Equality: Equality Mainstreaming and Constitutionalism of Socio-economic Rights, 61 N. Ir. Legal Q.
93, 96 (2010).
67
Id. at 99.
68
Id. at 97.
69
Id.
70
Catherine A. MacKinnon, Substantive Equality: A Perspective, 96 Minn.
L. Rev 1, 11 (2011-2012) [hereinafter MacKinnon 2011-2012].
71
MacKinnon 2000, supra note 23, at 14.

2015]

Gender Mainstreaming

137

took their three daughters in violation of the protective order. The
police refused to look for him or enforce the order and the husband
later killed his three daughters and himself. The Supreme Court
said that Jessica Gonzales had no property interest in police enforcement of her restraining order and therefore could not demand
that the police enforce the order. By looking at a restraining order
as a piece of property that anyone is entitled to, the court missed
the fact that it is predominately women who get restraining orders
against abusive partners. It is also mainly women who depend on
the police to actually enforce the order. The Supreme Court failed
to recognize the gender component of obtaining a restraining order and expecting that order to be enforced. Seeing a restraining
order as a property right means that everyone is formally entitled
to equal treatment under the language of the order, but misses the
point that a restraining order is by its nature unequal. It is designed
to protect the obtainer of the order (usually a woman) from the actions of the person who is the subject of the order (usually a man).
When applying substantive equality to a restraining order, the unequal relationship is clear. It then becomes very clear that it is illogical and ridiculous to say that a woman has no property interest
in her restraining order.
Mainstreaming is a certain vision of how equality can be
achieved.72 It places equality issues at the center of decision-making. It requires thinking about equality in the design and delivery
of processes and policy in all areas of government.73 Rather than
waiting for a violation to occur and then taking remedial action,
mainstreaming is anticipatory and requires positive action from relevant actors to ensure that those most affected by the decisions in
this area have a say in the early stages.74 Sex inequality has changed
significantly since early court cases on “facial” discrimination between men and women. As such, the problem of sex inequality
looks considerably different than it once did. However, courts have
failed to recognize this difference.75 This has allowed the problem
to manifest in ways that are becoming increasingly difficult to root
out with a formal equality analysis. Veronica Percia proposes that
courts must formulate an alternative legal framework within which
to understand the problem of sex inequality so that they are better able to address its evolving nature. This alternative framework
should name bad ideology, not simply bad actors and differential
Smith & McLaughlin, supra note 66, at 100.
Id.
74
Id.
75
Veronica Percia, Sex Equality’s Unnamed Nemesis, 18 Mich. J. Gender &
L 113, 113 (2011-2012).
72
73

138

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.125

treatment, as sex equality’s nemesis. She goes on to posit that
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 is an appropriate starting
point for testing the workability of an alternative legal framework.77
When passing the Civil Rights Act, Congress declared that no adverse employment decision might be made “because of such individual’s race, color, religion, sex, or national origin.”78 However, a
senator seeking to sabotage the passage of the Amendment added
the term “sex” at the last minute.79 As it was a last minute addition,
what constitutes sex discrimination was unclear and has been left to
the courts to define. As such, courts have defaulted to comparisons
to determine the meaning of sex discrimination. The court does a
categorical comparison, asking if a member of the protected class
(usually women) have been treated differently than those of another class (usually men). The court sees both members (men and
women) as the same, which has led to absurd results.80 This means
that Title VII fails to do justice to the complexity of the problem of
sex inequality because courts lack a legal framework that can be applied consistently and broadly to sex discrimination cases.81 Gender
mainstreaming provides this legal framework. Whereas the “sex”
distinction was an afterthought put in the Civil Rights Act with the
ulterior motive of killing the bill, gender mainstreaming was designed to provide a specific framework that governments could use
to improve the lives of women and men. The gender mainstreaming definition from the Introduction as, “The process of assessing
the implications for women and men of any planned action, including legislation, policies or programmes, in all areas and at all levels.
It is a strategy of making women’s as well as men’s concerns and
experiences an integral dimension of the design, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation of the policies and programmes in all
political, economic and societal spheres so that women and men
benefit equally and inequality is not perpetuated[,]”82 provides
that result.
Freedom from sex discrimination, which based on its negative language is clearly a freedom from discrimination rather than a
right to equality, in Title VII is framed as one’s right, as a member of
the group woman to be treated the same as a given member of the
76

76
77
78
79
80
81
82

Id. at 113.
Id. at 114.
Id.
Id.
Id. at 114-15.
Id. at 115.
Johnstone, supra note 1, at 156.

2015]

Gender Mainstreaming

139

group man. This is the formal equality that Smith and McLaughlin talk about.84 In order to establish a valid claim that she has been
discriminated against, a woman must be able to establish membership in a given protected class.85 The Supreme Court in Oncale held
that Title VII protects men as well as women.86 With this holding,
the Supreme Court set up a tension between group and individual
rights. To respond to this tension the Supreme Court invented the
“similarly situated” test.87 This test asks, “Has the plaintiff been
treated ‘differently’ than a similarly situated individual of the opposite sex?”88 This analysis misses how “difference” is socially perceived through gender hierarchy and fails to recognize that promoting sex equality requires dismantling socially constructed gender
hierarchy.89 Furthermore, the similarly situated test assumes that
men are the norm and that the male experience is normal. Any
time a woman brings a challenge, her experience must be compared
to how a similarly situated man would respond. This analysis takes
away any agency a woman may have. It sees her as an “other” man
and fails to consider her own identity as an autonomous human.
Furthermore, in Brown, the Supreme Court was willing to
apply substantive equality to recognize that racial differences led
to economic and social disadvantage. If the court had applied the
“similarly situated” test to Brown there would still be “separate but
equal” facilities in this country. If the Supreme Court was willing
to deviate from formal equality with regards to race, then why are
they not with gender? The “similarly situated” test is another variation on separate but equal, and yet courts consistently uphold it as
a viable measure of gender discrimination. Gender mainstreaming
does not require establishing membership in a class or even showing that a woman is similarly situated to a man. It is a concept that
is based on both male and female autonomy. It does not require
women to be like men or vice versa. It only requires that a woman
or man be able to show that they benefitted equally from a policy or
program. Furthermore, gender mainstreaming does not wait for the
harm to occur as would happen under Title VII. Instead, it requires
looking at laws and policies before they are enacted. Justice Rehnquist wrote in Morrison that “no civilized system of justice could
83

Percia, supra note 75, at 120.
Smith & McLaughlin, supra note 66, at 96-97.
85
Percia, supra note 75, at 120.
86
Oncale v. Sundown Offshore Services, Inc., 523 U.S. 75, 78 (1998) (referenced in Percia, supra note 75 at 121).
87
Percia, supra note 75, at 121.
88
Id.
89
Id. at 122.
83
84

140

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.125

fail to provide . . . a remedy” but that the remedy must come from
the states.90 Gender mainstreaming provides this remedy.
Civil Rights
Julie Goldscheid argues that despite the setbacks in both Morrison and Gonzales, the civil rights framework still has the potential
to support needed reform by challenging structural inequalities.91
My question is, if the Supreme Court rejected civil rights remedies
in 2000 and again in 2005, why would they suddenly accept them in
2015? While Justices Sotamayor and Kagan are liberal judges, the
jurisprudence of the Supreme Court since 2005 on social issues and
human rights has trended more conservative. Only in the last year
has the Supreme Court struck down key provisions of the Voting
Rights Act92 and the protection of buffer zones around abortion
clinics.93 The Hobby Lobby decision94 has given more freedom for
religious values to trump basic rights to abortion and birth control.
Goldscheid says that civil rights legislation may provide a right of
action modeled on the 1994 VAWA civil rights remedy.95 However, both the VAWA 2005 and VAWA 2011 reauthorizations did not
contain provisions authorizing a private right of action against a
perpetrator. The connection between civil rights and gender violence has its roots in attempts by domestic violence survivors to
hold law enforcement responsible for failed responses to calls for
assistance.96
The Gonzales97 case mentioned previously follows this line of
cases. Jessica Gonzales Lenahan98 argued that law enforcement’s
failure to enforce her protection order against her husband constituted a violation of her due process rights.99 The Supreme Court, addressing only the procedural due process claim, rejected that claim
Sally F. Goldfarb, “No Civilized System of Justice”: The Fate of the Violence Against Women Act, 102 W. Va. L. Rev 499, 500 (1999-2002) quoting
from United States v. Morrison, 529 U.S. 598, 627 (2000) [hereinafter Goldfarb
1999-2002].
91
Julie Goldscheid, Rethinking Civil Rights and Gender Violence, 14 Geo. J.
Gender & L. 43, 45 (2013).
92
Shelby Cnty., Ala. v. Holder, 133 S.Ct. 2612 (2013).
93
McCullen v. Coakley, 134 S.Ct. 2518 (2014).
94
Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc., 134 S.Ct. 2751 (2014).
95
Goldscheid, supra note 91, at 45.
96
Id. at 51.
97
Town of Castle Rock, Colo. v. Gonzalez, 545 U.S. 748 (2005).
98
Jessica Gonzales now goes by Jessica Lenahan. The Supreme Court case
will be referred to as Gonzales, but Jessica herself will be referred to as Jessica
Lenahan.
99
Goldscheid, supra note 91, at 52.
90

2015]

Gender Mainstreaming

141

and held that Jessica Lenahan had no protected property interest
that would give rise to a procedural due process claim.100 Having
exhausted domestic remedies, Jessica Lenahan took her case to the
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. The Commission
found the United States to be in violation of international human
rights obligations to take reasonable steps to protect women from
domestic violence.101 It concluded that the United States failed to
act with due diligence to protect Jessica Lenahan and her daughters
and that this failure violated the obligation of the United States not
to discriminate and to provide equal protection under the law.
European Union And The United States
The European Union (“EU”) and the United States are quite
similar in regards to their gender statistics. In the United States
fifty-nine percent of women are in the labor force. In the EU 62.5%
of women are in the labor force. Women in the EU earned on average 17.5% less than men.102 Despite the pay averages in the EU in
general, the Netherlands, Denmark and Sweden, which have seventy-five percent of women in the labor force, have the highest rates
of part time work.103 Despite these numbers over the past two decades, Europe has made a concerted effort to equalize the roles of
women and men.104 The same cannot be said for the United States.
The EU is departing from its narrow formal/substantive equality
model and instead moving toward a “democracy equality model.”105
This model moves from recognition of equal rights and opportunities to enabling men and women to participate equally in all domains of citizenship.106 The object of the democracy equality model
is to unseat the tradition of separate spheres that has underpinned
so much discrimination against women.107
In 1965 the Treaty of Rome, which established the European Economic Community (“EEC”) dealt with sex equality in Article 119.108 This Article established the principle of “equal pay for
equal work.” In a 1976 case, the European Court of Justice held
Id. at 52-53.
Id. at 53.
102
Ruth Rubio-Marín, A New European Parity-Democracy Sex Equality
Model And Why It Won’t Fly in The United States, 60 Am. J. Comp. L. 99, 100
(2012).
103
Id.
104
Id.
105
Id.
106
Id.
107
Id. at 103.
108
Id. at 104.
100
101

142

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.125

sex equality to be a “founding principle of the EEC.” The Treaty of Amsterdam took equality a step further. Equality between
men and women was enshrined as a fundamental community value
in Article 2, while Article 3 incorporated gender mainstreaming.110
While the Articles of the Treaty of Rome were limited to non-discrimination and equal opportunities, the later Treaty of Amsterdam
shows an expansion in understanding of what equality between
men and women means.111 One of the main differences between
gender equality in the United States and in the EU is that the United States lacks a treaty or other legal instrument that establishes a
right to gender equality. Gender equality is certainly not a founding principle of the United States, nor is it enshrined anywhere in
the Constitution or United States case law. Efforts to enshrine gender equality in the Constitution have been met with resistance.
109

Germany
In this paper I look closely at Germany because it follows
a similar model of constitutional democracy to that of the United States.112 However, the United States and Germany demarcate
equality in different ways. The German Basic Law enumerates at
least nine traits for special attention, one of which is sex.113 The
United States, by contrast, is much more general, only saying in the
Fourteenth Amendment that “no State shall. . .deny any person
within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.”114 Germany has a stronger text in which to enforce equality norms than the
United States, as the United States mainly relies on judicial interpretation from the United States Supreme Court.115 Both courts
in Germany and in the United States rely on judicial reasoning
to flesh out equality. Both courts classify certain traits as suspect,
thereby meriting a more intensive judicial scrutiny.116 Here again,
the Germans are more specific. For instance, sex, parentage, race,
language, homeland and origin, faith, or religious or political opinions all merit heightened review under German law. By contrast, in
the United State only race, national origin, and alienage are suspect
Id. (Defrenne v. Société Anonyme Belge de Navigation Aérienne, 1976,
C-43/75 [ECR 455]).
110
Rubio-Marín, supra note 102, at 104.
111
Id.
112
Edward J. Eberle, Equality in Germany and the United States, 10 San Diego Int’l L.J 63, 64 (2008).
113
Id.
114
U.S. Const. amend. XIV, § 1.
115
Eberle, supra note 112, at 64.
116
Id. at 65.
109

2015]

Gender Mainstreaming

143

classes warranting a higher level of scrutiny. Eventually the Supreme Court classified other traits not as suspect thereby warranting the highest level of scrutiny, but as quasi-suspect under intermediate scrutiny warranting a lesser standard of scrutiny. Gender was
allocated to this intermediate, quasi-suspect status.118 Germany accords sex their highest level of judicial scrutiny. The United States
on the other hand, only accorded gender an invented, intermediate
level of scrutiny. This difference is telling. Gender discrimination is
higher priority under German law than American.
This difference can be traced to differences in the constitutions. Both constitutions possess negative liberties. This means a
limitation of federal power so people can live their lives as they
choose. However, the United States Constitution is only a negative obligation constitution that emphasizes liberty and individual
rights, whereas the basis of the German constitution is human dignity.119 This is the key difference. The human dignity emphasis in
the German constitution obligates the German state to promote
human dignity. There is no similar requirement in the United States
Constitution. Germany went a step farther in promoting gender
equality in 1994 by adopting an amendment that now obligates the
state to “support and promote gender equality.”120 In addition to
the gender equality requirements in their own constitution, Germany is also obligated under EU law to promote gender equality.121
There is no such requirement in the United States. The few international treaties that the United States has ratified that seem to
obligate gender equality have simply been ignored by the United
States. Another key difference between Germany and the United
States is how they achieve equality. German law is concerned with
both formal and substantive equality. The German Constitutional
Court will impose positive obligations on the state to achieve this.
By contrast the Supreme Court is only concerned with achieving
formal legal equality and will then leave women and men to work
out for themselves how to achieve this equality.122 Unfortunately,
these actions by the Supreme Court are in line with the liberty view
of the United States Constitutional tradition.
117

Id. at 67.
Id. at 72 (citing Frontiero v. Richardson, 411 U.S. 677 (1973)).
119
Id. at 79-80.
120
Id. at 88.
121
Id. at 93-94.
122
Id. at 106.
117

118

144

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.125

Local Approaches
State and local engagement in foreign affairs has fallen into
three categories: 1) direct engagement with foreign governments
on issues of mutual concern, 2) symbolic statements, such as resolutions, and 3) local adoption and implementation of international
standards regardless of whether these have been adopted by the
federal government.123 For the purposes of this paper, I am going
to concentrate on the third category. Adopting international standards into local laws is circumscribed by constitutional requirements that prevent states from entering into treaties. However,
state and local government continue to test the boundaries in areas
where the responsibilities of state and local governments are less
clearly delineated.124
San Francisco
In April 1998, the city of San Francisco adopted the provisions
of CEDAW into local law, despite the fact that the United States
has not yet ratified CEDAW. Part of the reason for this action was
because San Francisco wanted to send a message to Washington
and urge the federal government to ratify the treaty.125 The San
Francisco ordinance defines discrimination as:
distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis of
sex that has the effect or purpose of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise by women, irrespective of their marital status, on the basis of equality
of men and women, of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil
or any other field.126
This language goes further than the definition of equality in the
United States Constitution and most state constitutions.127 Gender mainstreaming has also been used to enforce the legislation.
Certain city departments are required to undergo extensive gender
analysis to identify all areas of gender discrimination in their internal practices and service delivery.128 All city departments are also
123
Martha F. Davis, Thinking Globally, Acting Locally: States, Municipalities,
and International Human Rights, in Bringing Human Rights Home 258, 259
(Cynthia Soohoo, Catherine Albisa and Martha F. Davis, eds., 2009).
124
Id.
125
Id. at 268.
126
Id. at 269; San Francisco, Cal., Admin. Code Sec. 12K.6 (1998), available
at http://sfgov.org/dosw/cedaw-ordinance.
127
Davis, supra note 123, at 269.
128
Id.

2015]

Gender Mainstreaming

145

required to participate in human rights trainings. As of 2008, six
agencies had completed a gender analysis. Initially there was hostility from some departments who saw it as “just one more group
looking over their shoulder telling them what to do.”129 However,
once some of these agencies actually started conducting the gender
analysis, there was a shift in perception. An example of a department that experienced this shift was the Art Commission. The Art
Commission primarily funded male artists for large-scale public art
projects. Once the Commission was provided the tools to conduct
strategic planning with a gender perspective they found that the
way they had set up the system made it difficult for people with
children to get into it, so they changed the program.130
This type of analysis is what I advocate for through the use
of gender mainstreaming. In San Francisco’s case, they conducted
their gender mainstreaming analysis after implementing CEDAW
into their city code. However, I believe that a gender mainstreaming analysis can happen without implementing any international mechanisms. The reason that gender mainstreaming can work
is because all it requires is to look at how a program or policy as
implemented affects women. It does not require changing laws. I
believe that gender mainstreaming could start conversations about
gender equality, even in areas of the United States that are hostile
to any type of international human rights. Cities and towns across
the country can perform the Art Commission’s analysis for gender
equality, irrespective of their interest in international human rights.
A further example is that the Department of Public Works
found that women often felt unsafe in the city at night because
the streetlights were placed too far apart.131 This type of thinking,
where cities examine how to become safer for women, is taking
root around the world. The City of Vienna in Austria, took a look at
how to make the city work better for women.132 London conducted
a similar analysis on making the Underground safer, after it was revealed that fifteen percent of women and girls had experienced unwanted sexual touching on the Underground, but ninety percent of
them had never reported it.133 This type of analysis also transcends
Id. at 270.
Id.
131
Id.
132
Clare Foran, How to Design A City for Women, Citylab (Sept. 16, 2013),
http://www.citylab.com/commute/2013/09/how-design-city-women/6739/.
133
Laura Bates, Project Guardian: Making Public Transportation Safer for Women, The Guardian (Oct. 1, 2013, 2:00 AM), http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/the-womens-blog-with-jane-martinson/2013/oct/01/
project-guardian-public-transport-safer-women.
129
130

146

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.125

the public/private divide. This analysis acknowledges that women
use public spaces and looks at how to make these spaces safer and
more inviting to women.
This analysis also asks us to acknowledge that women and
men use public spaces differently and thus have different needs and
requirements in these spaces. For example, the city of Vienna asked
women and men about their use of public transportation and how
to improve the system, and found that men use the system to go to
and from work and were happy with it. Women, on the other hand,
also used the system to go to and from work, but also used it to
take children to school, go grocery shopping, and help their elderly
parents. As a result, the city installed more lighting, widened pedestrian thoroughfares, and made stairways easier to navigate with
strollers or in wheelchairs.134 Vienna would never had known of
these different gender needs if they had not asked their populace
the question. The city next looked at their parks and realized that
after age nine girls disappeared from park spaces. Observation revealed that with limited space, boys, who were more assertive, often won and pushed the girls out. The City responded by widening
footpaths and adding volleyball and badminton courts to allow for
a wider variety of activities. City officials noticed the change immediately. Groups of boys and girls began using the parks without any
group overrunning the other. Gender mainstreaming in the city of
Vienna only required looking at how men and women used public
spaces differently.135 This is all gender mainstreaming requires. It
only requires asking questions and making observations. It is preferred that the United States ratify CEDAW. San Francisco has
ratified CEDAW and uses gender mainstreaming. However, the
process of gender mainstreaming works on its own regardless of the
existence of treaties or laws on women’s rights.
On October 11, 2011, the Cincinnati City Council enacted a
resolution declaring that freedom from domestic violence is a fundamental human right and that it is the responsibility of state and
local governments to secure human rights on behalf of its citizens.136
Baltimore followed suit on March 19, 2012, and enacted a similar
resolution. Language in the Baltimore bill cited CEDAW, recommendations to the United States from the UN Special Rapporteur on Violence Against Women, and the holding of the Lenahan
Id.
Foran, supra note 132.
136
Ctr. for Human Rights & Humanitarian Law, Cities Counties, and Human Rights Commissions Across the U.S. Pass Freedom from Domestic Violence
Resolutions, Am. Univ. Wash. Coll. of Law, http://www.wcl.american.edu/humright/center/dvresolutions.cfm (last visited Apr. 8, 2015).
134
135

2015]

Gender Mainstreaming

147

Decision of the Inter-American Commission.
In Florida, the
Miami Dade County Board of Commission passed an analogous
resolution on July 17, 2012. The Miami Dade County Bill cited the
UN Rapporteur recommendations and the holding in the Lenahan
case.138 On September 6, 2012, the Seattle Human Rights Commission passed a resolution urging the United States House of Representatives to pass the Senate’s comprehensive version of VAWA.
They also framed violence against women in terms of human rights
and cited the Lenahan case and the finding of the UN Special Rapporteur.139 In October 2012, the Albany, NY County Executive,
Common Council, and County Legislature passed proclamations
or unanimous resolutions declaring freedom from domestic violence to be a fundamental human right.140 Also, in October, the city
and county officials in Montgomery County, Alabama signed a Domestic Violence Awareness Month proclamation, which declared
October domestic violence awareness month for Montgomery and
included a declaration that freedom from domestic violence is a
fundamental human right.141 International human rights norms are
gaining footing in the United States at the local level. As more
and more United States lawyers are trained in human rights, international human rights will begin to take a strong place in United
States law. Gender mainstreaming provides the framework for how
to implement gender equality.
137

The Inter-American Human Rights System
The Inter-American system consists of two bodies for protecting human rights, the Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights and Inter-American Court on Human Rights.142 Article 64 of
the American Convention has been interpreted to hold all member
states subject to the protection of the American Declaration.143 Under the Organization of American States (“OAS”) charter, member
states are bound by either the American Declaration of the Rights
Council B. 12-0034R, 2012, Balt. City Council (Md. 2012), available at
http://legistar.baltimorecitycouncil.com/attachments/8843.pdf.
138
Memorandum from R.A. Ceuvas, Jr, Cnty. Attorney to Bd. of Cnty.
Comm’rs (Jul. 17, 2012) available at http://www.wcl.american.edu/humright/
center/dvresolutions.cfm.
139
Ctr. for Human Rights & Humanitarian Law, supra note 136.
140
Id.
141
Id.
142
Brooke Stedman, The Leap from Theory to Practice: Snapshot of Women’s Rights Through A Legal Lens, 29 Merkourious-Utrecht J. Int’l & Eur. L.
4, 7 (2013).
143
Id.
137

148

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.125

and Duties of Man or the American Convention on Human Rights.
The United States did not ratify the American Declaration and
is therefore not subject to the jurisdiction of the Inter-American
Court.144 However, the Commission argues that even though the
United States has not ratified the American Declaration they are
subject to the principles of universal human rights as stated in the
OAS Charter and American Convention.145 According to the Inter-American Commission, the United States is bound as a matter
of law to take affirmative acts to give effect to the rights contained
in the Declaration.146 The Commission’s recommendations are not
binding though. The Inter-American Commission offers those who
have been denied access to United States courts the opportunity to
have their case heard.147 The best example for our purposes is the
Lenahan domestic violence decision. Therefore, the United States
has two options, apply gender mainstreaming to United States law
or find itself subject to the remit of the Inter-American Commission.
At the same time human rights practitioners must strike a
balance between holding the United States accountable for human
rights violations and risk losing the funding that the United States
sends to the Inter-American system. The United States, though not
a signatory to the Convention, does send a huge amount of funding
to the Inter-American System. The loss of that funding would have
a catastrophic affect on the Inter-American System. At the same
time, part of taking cases before international bodies and tribunals,
even if the decisions are not binding on the state, is to build up a
body of international law and norms. Even though the Commission’s decision in Lenahan is not binding on the United States, and
though the United States has done its best to ignore the decision, it
has still put the United States on notice that someone is paying attention to how we treat women. Also, as more and more lawyers in
the United States become familiar with international human rights
decisions like those in Lenahan, they will serve as a guide for drafting laws in the United States and for how to bring future cases.148
Id.
Id.
146
Max D. Siegel, Surviving Castle Rock: The Human Rights of Domestic
Violence, 18 Cardozo J.L. & Gender 727, 731 (2012).
147
Stedman, supra note 142, at 133.
148
See Caroline Bettinger-Lopez, Introduction: Jessica Lenahan (Gonzales)
v. United States: Implementation, Litigation, and Mobilization Strategies, 21 Am.
U.J. Gender Soc. Pol’y & L. 207, 220-21 (2012); Jill Laurie Goodman, The Idea
of Violence Against Women: Lessons from United States v. Jessica Lenahan, The
Federal Civil Rights Remedy, And The New York State Anti-Trafficking Campaign, 36 N.Y.U. Rev. L. & Soc. Change 593, 611 (2012).
144
145

2015]

Gender Mainstreaming

149

The US has avoided ratifying human rights treaties to avoid
being bound by their requirements. However, taking United States
human rights issues to the international community creates pressure on the United States to change domestic policy. The cities
mentioned above that all cited the Lenahan decision when declaring that freedom from domestic violence is a human right, are
perfect examples of the need to take cases to international courts,
even if the decisions are not legally binding. The Lenahan decision
gave weight to the cities’ human rights declarations and provided
a framework from which to work when making their declarations.
Though the Inter-American Commission’s holding in Lenahan is
not legally binding, it achieved the goal of showing both that United States law enforcement still does not adequately address violence against women and that United States courts see no problem
with denying a woman access to the court system. The Lenahan
decision will hopefully start to draw attention to the United States’
abysmal record with regard to women’s equality. This is the reason it is imperative for the United States to adopt gender mainstreaming. If gender mainstreaming is adopted the United States
can then create laws on its own terms and avoid the embarrassment
of international approbation.
The United States continues to bank on the fact that many
activists do not know how to use international mechanisms. The
United States hopes that by refusing to ratify treaties, publicize
its reports to UN bodies, and educate the public about their rights
under human rights treaties, it can continue to deny basic human
rights to its own citizens, even as it preaches about human rights to
the rest of the world.149 Gender mainstreaming is the tool by which
advocates, politicians and members of the public can learn about
their human rights. Mainstreaming can start a conversation that
can eventually lead to legislation.
Possible Counter Arguments—Why Gender Mainstreaming
Would Not Work in The United States
The biggest challenge in the United States to gender equality is the conservative religious forces that see every instance of an
affirmation of women’s rights as a threat to the family.150 This applies to suffrage, the Equal Rights Amendment reproductive rights,
and the ratification of CEDAW.151 In this way of thinking, gender
mainstreaming is likely to be seen as a threat to the family and
See Bettinger-Lopez, supra note 148, at 120-21.
Rubio-Marín, supra note 102, at 120.
151
Id. at 120-21.
149
150

150

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.125

federalism notions of locating family within the sphere of state jurisdiction that succeeded in killing the civil rights remedy to VAWA
in Morrison.152 Gender mainstreaming would be viewed as social
engineering forcing women out of, and men into the home.153 Yet,
if one takes a close look at gender mainstreaming it requires us to
ask what is good for women and men. It allows for the space for
women and men to make choices about what is best for them and
their family. Gender mainstreaming does not impose a positive obligation on anyone to do anything, it merely asks whether existing
laws and policies benefit men and women of every political and
philosophical worldview.
Conclusion
Gender mainstreaming is the process by which women’s
equality can be fully realized. Gender mainstreaming is particularly vital in the United States, given that the Supreme Court appears
to be more conservative on gender issues and is applying a narrow
view of federalism, which when combined with a strict adherence
to formal equality and a Negative Constitutional tradition, has acted as a bar to full equality for women in the United States. When
laws and rules no longer work, instead of trying the same approach
and expecting different results, it is time to come up with a new
approach. Gender mainstreaming is a new approach for achieving
gender equality. It requires only the willingness to engage in discussion and ask questions. At the same time, it is important not to
be overly naive about gender mainstreaming. It is not a magic cure
all that will end discrimination and violence against women. It is
still subject to the whims of local politicians and to attitudes about
women and gender equality. However, it is another tool in the belt
of women’s rights advocates who have had few legal options to begin with and who seem to have pushed the existing legal envelope
as far as it will go.

152
153

Id. at 121.
Id.

