GENDER DIFFERENCES IN
NEGOTIATION:

Implications for Salary Negotiations

Julia Johnson*
We might think of gender as a transcendent and analytic category whose truth, though false, remains central to
thought; indeed, it constructs the very analytic categories
we would use to deconstruct it.
—Virginia Goldner
Introduction
Despite incentives aimed at achieving equality for women
in the workforce, women continue to lag behind men in terms of
pay and leadership positions. This is despite the fact that women,
on average, have equal or better educational credentials and offer
comparable skill sets to employers.1 A variety of causal factors have
been postulated for this disparity,2 including women’s tendency to
choose to enter fields with lower pay at higher rates than men,3 and
* J.D., Duke University School of Law, 2014.
1
Numerous reasons for the pay gap between men and women have been
postulated. This article will only address one particular factor contributing to
differences in salary between men and women, namely differences in salary
negotiations. See, e.g., Allie Bidwell, Women More Likely to Graduate College,
but Still Earn Less Than Men, U.S. News (Oct. 31, 2014, 11:18 AM), http://www.
usnews.com/news/blogs/data-mine/2014/10/31/women-more-likely-to-graduate-college-but-still-earn-less-than-men (noting that “[e]ven when men and
women have similar levels of education, men end up earning more over time”).
2
See Francine D. Blau, Where Are We in the Economics of Gender? The
Gender Pay Gap 1 (Nat’l Bureau of Econ. Research, Working Paper No. 5664,
1996) (providing that “[r]esearch on the gender pay gap has traditionally focused on the role of what might be termed, gender-specific factors, particularly gender differences in qualifications and differences in the treatment of
otherwise equally qualified male and female workers [—] i.e., labor market
discrimination”).
3
See id. (manuscript at 3).
© 2016 Julia Johnson. All rights reserved.

131

132

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 23.131

their greater concern for work-life balance in order to prioritize
childcare obligations.4 However, another contributing factor exists
that receives less attention: often, women are not as effective at
self-advocacy in the workplace as are men. Women may fear the
potential negative social consequences of ardent self-promotion,
and this can lead to a reticence to negotiate that results in women
receiving significantly less pay for the same work as men.5
Part II of this article explores the nature of the gender disparity manifested in the salary negotiations process. Part III discusses
a number of culturally dictated gender stereotypes and behavioral
norms that can act as obstacles to women’s success in salary negotiations. Finally, Part IV recommends several strategies and tactics
intended to enhance women’s effectiveness in salary negotiations
that women may take into consideration.
I. The Impact of Gender on Salary Negotiations
Women earn significantly less during their lifetimes, on average, than do men.6 Women’s relative ineffectiveness at salary negotiation is one factor contributing to this multi-faceted problem. The
4
See, e.g., Lynda Laughlin, Who’s Minding the Kids? Child Care Arrangements: Spring 2011, U.S. Census Bureau 1 (Apr. 2013), https://www.census.gov/
prod/2013pubs/p70-135.pdf; Kim Parker & Wendy Wang, Modern Parenthood:
Roles of Moms and Dads Converge as They Balance Work and Family, Pew
Research Ctr. 1 (Mar. 14, 2013), http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2013/03/14/
modern-parenthood-roles-of-moms-and-dads-converge-as-they-balancework-and-family/ (stating that “when it comes to what they value most in a
job, working fathers place more importance on having a high-paying job,
while working mothers are more concerned with having a flexible schedule”); Tara Parker-Pope, Do Women Like Child Care More Than Men?, N.Y.
Times (Mar. 22, 2012, 12:01 AM), http://well.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/03/22/
do-women-like-child-care-more-than-men/?_r=0.
5
See Margaret A. Neale & Thomas Z. Lys, More Reasons Women Need
to Negotiate Their Salaries, Harv. Bus. Rev. (June 29, 2015), https://hbr.
org/2015/06/more-reasons-women-need-to-negotiate-their-salaries. See generally Linda Babcock & Sara Laschever, Women Don’t Ask: Negotiation and
the Gender Divide (2003).
6
Lisa M. Maatz, The Awful Truth Behind the Gender Pay Gap, Forbes (Apr.
7, 2014, 5:12 PM), http://www.forbes.com/sites/forbeswomanfiles/2014/04/07/
the-awful-truth-of-the-gender-pay-gap-it-gets-worse-as-women-age/ (“For the
last decade, median earnings for women working full time, year-round have
been just 77% of men’s earnings.”); Alexandra Sifferlin, Women Earn 24%
Less Than Men on Average, U.N. Report Finds, Time (Apr. 27, 2015), http://time.
com/3836977/un-women-wages-and-careers/ (finding that “women around the
world earn 24% less than men”); Did You Know That Women Are Still Paid
Less Than Men?, The White House, https://www.whitehouse.gov/equal-pay/
career (last visited Oct. 24, 2016) (stating that “[o]n average, full-time working
women earn just 78 cents for every dollar a man earns”).

2016]

Gender Differences in Negotiation

133

results of social science research suggests that, in general, women
achieve less impressive outcomes from workplace salary negotiation because (1) women tend to undervalue the worth of their
skillset,7 (2) women tend to be more hesitant to enter into salary
negotiations in the first place than are men, especially when such
negotiations are characterized by a high degree of structural ambiguity,8 and (3) women tend to feel less comfortable when negotiating on behalf of themselves than when on behalf of others.9
A.

Women Often Undervalue the Economic Worth of Their
Skillsets
Entitlement theory suggests that women tend to believe they
are entitled to less compensation for their efforts than do men, and
negotiate accordingly.10 Coupled with women’s lower compensation
expectations, studies have shown that men often appear outwardly more confident than women, which increases men’s credibility.11 Men also tend to overestimate their abilities when comparing
themselves to others to a greater extent than do women, thereby
influencing their respective salary requests.12 Further, male overconfidence is more likely to occur in the context of competitive
activities, which includes workplace salary negotiations (see below
for a lengthier discussion of culturally enforced gender norms).13
Illustrating gender disparities in perceived salary worth, one
study developed an ultimatum game that compared women’s pay
7
See, e.g., Hannah Riley Bowles et al., Social Incentives for Gender Differences in the Propensity to Initiate Negotiations: Sometimes It Does Hurt to
Ask, 103 Organizational Behav. and Hum. Decision Processes 84, 100 (2007)
[hereinafter Sometimes It Does Hurt to Ask] (discussing gender roles in negotiation). See also Hannah Riley Bowles et al., Constraints and Triggers: Situational Mechanics of Gender in Negotiation, 89 J. Personality & Soc. Psychol.
951, 951 (2005) [hereinafter Constraints and Triggers] (exploring a finding that
women obtained lower salary offers in negotiation).
8
See e.g., Jens Mazei, et. al., A Meta-Analysis on Gender Differences in Negotiation Outcomes and Their Moderators, 141 Psychological Bull. 85, 87–88,
94–95 (2015) (discussing role of structural ambiguity).
9
Charles B. Craver, Effective Legal Negotiation and Settlement 272−73
(7th ed. 2016).
10
See, e.g., Sometimes It Does Hurt to Ask, supra note 7, at 100 (discussing
gender roles in negotiation). See also Constraints and Triggers, supra note 7, at
951.
11
Deborah M. Weiss, All Work Cultures Discriminate, 24 Hastings Women’s L.J. 247, 268 (2013) (finding that “[o]n average, men are substantially more
self-confident than women”).
12
See id. (“Men are more likely to overestimate their own accuracy in comparison to true values [—] miscalibrate [, and] to overestimate their own accuracy relative to that of other people [—] the better-than-average effect”).
13
Id. at 264.

134

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 23.131

expectations with men’s. In the game, researchers found that
“participants who knew the gender of the other player allocated
more money (as Player 1) to men than to women and were willing
to accept less money (as Player 2) from men than from women,”
leading men to earn more money overall.15 Upon reviewing the
results, researchers reasoned that players implicitly presumed that
women would be willing to accept less money than would men.16
Building upon these findings, another study that interviewed 1,500
employment professionals found that “44 percent of respondents
perceived women’s willingness to work for less money than men to
be a ‘very’ or ‘extremely’ important cause of the gender gap.”17 This
study suggests that many employers believe women are willing to
work for lower salaries than their male counterparts, and thus may
offer lower salaries to women for the same job.18
Some studies suggest that the gender gap in pay expectations
begins as early as high school, and that women tend to compare
their salary expectations only to other women in their immediate
peer group.19 This dynamic continues after women are hired for
entry-level positions. For example, one study found that women
lawyers often underreport their billable hours, thereby further perpetuating gender salary disparities.20 Furthermore, another study
14

14
See Sara J. Solnick, Gender Differences in the Ultimatum Game, 39 Econ.
Inquiry 189, 199 (2001); Sara J. Solnick & Maurice E. Schweitzer, The Influence
of Physical Attractiveness and Gender on Ultimatum Game Decisions, 79 Organizational Behav. & Hum. Decision Processes 199 (1999). See also Catherine Eckel et al., Is More Information Always Better? An Experimental Study of
Charitable Giving and Hurricane Katrina, 74 S. Econ. J. 388, 395, 405 (2007).
15
Hannah Riley Bowles & Kathleen L. McGinn, Untapped Potential in the
Study of Negotiation and Gender Inequality in Organizations, 2 Acad. of Mgmt
Annals 99, 107 (2008).See also Eckel et al., supra note 14, at 405.
16
Bowles & McGinn, supra note 15, at 99; Solnick, supra note 14, at 199.
17
Bowles & McGinn, supra note 15, at 107 (citing Barry Gerhart & Sara
Rynes, Determinants and Consequences of Salary Negotiations by Male and Female MBA Graduates, 76 J. Applied Psychol. 256, 256 (1991) and Sara Rynes et
al., Evaluating Comparable Worth: Three Perspectives, 28 Bus. Horizons 82, 82
(1985)).
18
See Bowles & McGinn, supra note 15, at 107.
19
Vicki S. Kaman & Charmine E. J. Hartel, Gender Differences in Anticipated Pay Negotiation Strategies and Outcomes, 9 J. of Bus. & Psychol. 183, 184
(1994) (citations omitted) (noting that “[e]xplanations for men’s higher pay expectations include (a) gender differences in pay histories, indicating that women, from their first high-school jobs, have experienced lower average pay than
men; (b) women’s lower performance expectations, and tendency to compensate themselves less compared to men; and (c) the tendency of individuals to
use same-sex comparison information when formulating their expectations”).
20
Ronit Dinovitzer et al., The Differential Valuation of Women’s Work: A
New Look at the Gender Gap in Lawyers’ Incomes, 88 Soc. Forces 819, 849

2016]

Gender Differences in Negotiation

135

followed men and women professionals at a major products company and found that, over time, men were able to improve their
salaries by transferring laterally to a different company, whereas
these same lateral moves did not result in comparable salary gains
for women.21 These findings were replicated with recent MBA graduates in yet another study.22 This evidence suggests that the initial entry-level salary offers played a role in the graduates’ salary
increases years later.23
B.

Structural Ambiguity and Women’s Reluctance to Enter into
Salary Negotiations
Women tend to be less willing to enter into salary negotiations than are men. This reluctance has measurable consequences:
women who do not negotiate their salaries have, on average, lower
lifetime earnings than women who do negotiate their salaries.24 In
one study of graduate students, only 7 percent of women negotiated with prospective employers for an increased wage, while 57
percent of men did so, which likely played a role in men’s salaries
being on average 7.6 percent higher than women’s.25 This likely at
least partially explains why legislative efforts such as the passage
of the Equal Pay Act26 have not been wholly effective in closing
the gap between men’s and women’s wages.27 Women’s reticence to
(2009). See also Nancy Reichman & Joyce Sterling, Sticky Floors, Broken Steps,
and Concrete Ceilings in Legal Careers, 14 Tex. J. Women & L. 27, 58 (2004) (describing billing disparities between male and female lawyers).
21
Reichman & Sterling, supra note 20, at 45.
22
See Barry Gerhart & Sara Rynes, Determinants and Consequences of
Salary Negotiations by Male and Female MBA Graduates, 76 J. Applied Psychol. 256, 256 (1991); see also Sara Rynes et al., Evaluating Comparable Worth:
Three Perspectives, 28 Bus. Horizons 82, 82 (1985) (discussing negotiation study
among MBA graduates).
23
Id.
24
Babcock & Laschever, supra note 5, at 6, (citing Robin L. Pinkley &
Gregory B. Northcraft, Get Paid What You’re Worth 6 (2003)) (estimating
that “a woman who routinely negotiates her salary increases will earn over one
million dollars more by the time she retires than a woman who accepts what
she’s offered every time without asking for more. And that figure doesn’t include the interest on the extra amount earned.”). Over time, these factors work
to disadvantage women on a broader scale. See generally Virginia Valian, Why
So Slow?: The Advancement of Women (1999).
25
Babcock & Laschever, supra note 5, at 1. Interestingly, in the study, women who negotiated their salaries were able to increase their salaries by roughly
the same percentage as men, thereby suggesting that women’s reticence to negotiate was the key factor in their lower starting salary offers.
26
The Equal Pay Act of 1963, Pub. L. No. 88-38, 77 Stat. 56 (codified as
amended at 29 U.S.C. § 206(d)(1) (1963)).
27
Christine Elzer, Wheeling, Dealing, and the Glass Ceiling: Why the Gender

136

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 23.131

negotiate likewise makes it easier for employers to take advantage
of women’s lower salary expectations.28
Structural ambiguity—defined as the degree to which the
attendant circumstances and expected behaviors in a situation are
unclear—may also affect women’s willingness to negotiate their
salaries, as well as the effectiveness of any negotiations ultimately
undertaken. A salary negotiation session often fits the category of
a high structural ambiguity activity, meaning that individuals who
engage in salary negotiations experience high levels of uncertainty
as to what are appropriate bargaining parameters and how salary demands will be received by superiors.29 One study examined
differences in salary negotiations among MBA students in a variety of industry sectors. In sectors with low structural ambiguity
such as investment banking and consulting where salary bands are
relatively standardized,30 in which men and women were equally
likely to negotiate salaries, the salaries offered to men and women were comparable. 31 On the other end of the spectrum, sectors
with high levels of structural ambiguity such as telecommunications
and advertising,32 in which men were more likely than women to
enter into salary negotiations, men’s and women’s starting salaries
differed by nearly $10,000.33 Moreover, the researchers predicted
that a $10,000 gap in initial starting salaries may ultimately result
in an earnings disparity of nearly $1.5 million over the course of a
career.34
Differences in Salary Negotiation is Not a “Factor Other Than Sex” Under the
Equal Pay Act, 10 Geo. J. Gender & L. 1, 2 (2009).
28
Neale & Lys, supra note 5.
29
See Constraints and Triggers, supra note 7, at 952.
30
Id. at 954.
31
Id. at 957 (“U]sing a relatively subtle manipulation of structural ambiguity that controlled for perceptions of the bargaining range and changed only the
negotiators’ information about appropriate standards for agreement, we found
that reduced structural ambiguity was associated with significantly diminished
gender differences in competitive bargaining.”).
32
Id. at 954.
33
Id. at 956.
34
Id. at 963 (“After controlling for a broad range of salary predictors, there
still remained a $10,000 gender gap in MBA salaries in industries with high
structural ambiguity. Assuming that MBAs graduate at age 30 and work until
they are 65 and that they receive only a 3% raise per year, the value of a gender
gap in starting salary of $10,000 amounts to a gender gap in earnings of more
than $600,000 over the course of a career. Assuming 5% annual interest on
those additional earnings, that gender gap in earnings becomes a wealth gap of
$1.5 million. Even small and situationally bound effects can have economically
important implications.”). See Alice H. Eagly, Differences Between Women and
Men: Their Magnitude, Practical Importance, and Political Meaning, 51 Am. Psychologist 158, 158−59 (1996).

2016]

Gender Differences in Negotiation

137

Evidence also suggests that men tend to be more effective
and ambitious negotiators than women in situations with high
structural ambiguity—that is, in scenarios where expectations and
roles are unclear. On the other hand, an example of a negotiation
scenario with low structural ambiguity would be a flea market or a
public auction, where it is well-understood by all participants that
price-haggling is acceptable and expected. One study found that
while men expected to receive—and ultimately obtained—higher
returns during the high-structural ambiguity negotiation, the gender
gap was closed during low-structural ambiguity negotiations. In the
latter negotiation, men and women had similar entering goals and
similar outcomes.35 During the high-ambiguity exercise, a shopping
simulation in which consumers engaged in price bargaining with a
retailer for the lowest price on a bundle of goods, men bargained
for and paid a sum 27 percent lower than the average amount bargained for and paid by women.36 Researchers postulated that this
disparity may be explained by women’s reluctance to pressure.37
C.

Women Tend To Be More Effective When Negotiating on
Behalf of Others
Research has indicated that women are significantly more
effective and aggressive negotiators when negotiating on the behalf
of others, rather than for their own benefit.38 One study determined that women are less likely to fear the loss of social credibility and reputation when negotiating on behalf of another person
than when doing so on their own behalf.39 Similarly, another study
looked at whether shifting the beneficiary of the negotiation from
the negotiator to a third party would affect the outcome. The study
determined that women negotiators set 22% higher initial targets
when the negotiation’s beneficiary was someone other than themselves, illustrating the extent to which women’s concerns that their
Constraints and Triggers, supra note 7, at 955.
Id. at 957.
37
Id. (noting that the study found “that reduced structural ambiguity was
associated with significantly diminished gender differences in competitive
bargaining”).
38
Craver, supra note 9, at 272−73 (providing that “when women are put in
situations in which they are asked to negotiate on behalf of others—instead of
themselves—they work more diligently to obtain optimal results for the persons they are representing”).
39
Andrea Kupfer Schneider et al., Likeability v. Competence: The Impossible Choice Faced by Female Politicians, Attenuated by Lawyers, 17 Duke J.
Gender L. & Pol’y 363, 380 (2010) (providing that “assertive behavior faces
little backlash when it is seen as protecting colleagues or advocating on behalf
of teammates”).
35
36

138

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 23.131

self-promotion will not be well-received impacts the negotiation
process.40
This dynamic exists in the highest levels of the workplace: a
study of men and women executives found that “[f]emale executives
negotiated compensation agreements that were 18% higher when
they were representing someone else as opposed to themselves,
whereas there was less than a 0.5% difference in the performance
of male executives across the representation role conditions.”41
These studies suggest that even the most professionally successful
women fear the negative repercussions of deviating from culturally
constructed gender norms. While men are expected to behave in
an aggressive, authoritative, and competitive manner, women are
often expected to defer to men’s positions.42 When women engage
in assertive behavior, they are often perceived as selfish and less
likeable.43 When a woman acts in a stereotypically assertive manner, she risks a proportionally greater loss of social reputation than
would a man behaving in a similar way.44 One study reviewing the
effects of prescriptive stereotypes on women’s salary negotiations
found that, when women made poorly received attempts at salary
negotiation during an otherwise successful hiring process, they were
subsequently more negatively perceived by their new coworkers.45
40
Hannah Riley & Linda Babcock, Gender as a Situational Phenomenon
in Negotiation 24–25 (Harvard Kennedy Sch. Working Paper No. RWP02-037,
2002) (“The role shift from self-promotion to advocacy prompted female sellers to aspire and to ask for more from the negotiation and closed the gender
gap in performance targets and intended offer behavior. These findings suggest
that the women did not lack confidence in their competitive bargaining ability,
but either felt less entitled to demand value for themselves or inhibited by societal gender-roles from doing so.”).
41
Constraints and Triggers, supra note 7, at 959 (suggesting that “women
[were] particularly energized in negotiations in which they felt a personal sense
of responsibility or obligation to represent the interests of another person”).
See also Susan E. Cross & Laura Madson, Models of the Self: Self-Construals
and Gender, 122 Psychol. Bull. 5, 22 (1997) (“Women often enhance the self
by striving to protect or enhance relationship partners, whereas men are more
likely to overestimate the uniqueness of their own abilities and attributes and
to sabotage or denigrate a partner to enhance themselves.”).
42
Craver, supra note 9, at 275.
43
See Hannah Riley Bowles & Kathleen L. McGinn, Gender in Job Negotiations: A Two-Level Game 9 (Harv. Kennedy Sch., Working Paper No. 08-095,
2008).
44
See id.
45
See Sometimes It Does Hurt to Ask, supra note 7, at 99 (furthering that “[i]
f men have more freedom to negotiate for themselves than do women . . . then
that could help to explain phenomena, such as the gender wage gap and glass
ceiling”). See also Neale & Lys, supra note 5 (stating that “women are often perceived as greedy and demanding when trying to negotiate—an attribute rarely

2016]

Gender Differences in Negotiation

139

II. Culturally Enforced Gender Norms as Obstacles to
Women Negotiators
A variety of cultural factors contribute to the above-described
disparity between men’s and women’s negotiation outcomes. By no
means an exhaustive list of all such factors, this Part concentrates
on five that likely play particularly influential roles in hampering
women’s success in salary negotiations: (1) the traditional conception of competitiveness and assertiveness as masculine qualities, (2)
the culturally reinforced reality that women tend to identify communally while men tend to behave more individualistically, (3) the
strong emphasis that women tend to place on fairness, trust, and
reciprocity during the negotiation process, (4) the outdated but lingering notion of public and private spheres as gendered realms, and
(5) women’s tendency to perceive themselves as less powerful than
their male counterparts.
A.

Negotiation Is Inherently Competitive, a Quality
Stereotypically Associated with Men
First, negotiation is a competitive activity, and as such the
negotiation process itself may be intimidating to some women, who
have been steeped in cultural stereotypes about gendered behavioral norms and capabilities.46 Societal expectations for men’s and
women’s behavior differ, and as a result women often feel a greater
need to save face–or protect their reputation–than do men.47 Stereotypically “masculine” or competitive48 behaviors include “being
assertive, . . . dominant, forceful, [and] individualistic,” while stereotypically “feminine” or passive49 behaviors include “being sensitive to the needs of others, soft-spoken, sympathetic, understanding
ascribed to men”).
46
Deborah A. Small et al., Who Goes to the Bargaining Table? The Influence of Gender and Framing on the Initiation of Negotiation, 93 J. Personality
& Soc. Psychol. 600, 602 (2007) (describing gender differences in willingness
to negotiate by stating “the concept of negotiation is one such face-threatening
act, as it implies demands being made from a position of power,” which “would
be less threatening to men”).
47
Hannah Riley Bowles & Linda Babcock, Relational Accounts: An Answer
for Women to the Compensation Negotiation Dilemma 3 (Harvard Kennedy
Sch. Working Paper No. RWP08-066, 2008) (“Attempting to negotiate for higher compensation is socially risky for women because it violates prescriptive sex
stereotypes.”). See generally Alice H. Eagly & Linda L. Carli, Through the
Labyrinth: The Truth About How Women Become Leaders (2007).
48
For the purposes of this article, traditionally masculine behaviors will often be referred to as “assertive” or “competitive” behaviorisms.
49
For purposes of this article, traditionally feminine behaviors will frequently be referred to as “passive” behaviorisms.

140

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 23.131

and yielding.” The extent to which these behaviors are culturally
dictated versus inherently biological is a hotly debated issue, but
irrelevant to the fact that women who stray from these gendered
behavioral norms often pay a social price.51
50

B.

Communal Versus Agentic Self-Concepts
Women are more likely to have an interdependent, communal self-concept and thus tend to be more concerned with attaining
results that are fair to both parties in the negotiation process, which
can result in accepting an unnecessarily low offer.52 An individual
with a communal self-concept is empathetic to group needs and is
more focused upon group successes than individual ones.53 In contrast, an individual with an agentic self-concept is independent and
assertive, and places greater emphasis on personal successes.54 Men
are more likely to fall into the latter category.55 While nature may be
partially responsible for this gender disparity, cultural norms likely
play a significant role. Women are taught since childhood to focus
on shared successes, whereas men are encouraged to place a greater
emphasis on individual gains.56 Broadly, women may be more concerned with maintaining long-term relationships, whereas men are
more concerned with short-term outcomes.57
Relatedly, while men often “define themselves in terms of distinction from others,” women tend to place a significantly higher
Riley & Babcock, supra note 40, at 6.
See Bowles & McGinn, supra note 43 and accompanying text. See, e.g.,
Maria Konnikova, Lean Out: The Dangers for Women Who Negotiate, The New
Yorker (June 10, 2014), http://www.newyorker.com/science/maria-konnikova/
lean-out-the-dangers-for-women-who-negotiate (describing adverse repercussions to women who negotiate for salaries in the workplace). See also Catherine
H. Tinsley et al., Women at the Bargaining Table: Pitfalls and Prospects 4 (Marq.
U. L. Sch. Legal Stud. Res. Paper Series, Paper No. 09-19, 2009). There, researchers developed a study whereby subjects watched a series of videos in which men
and women finance directors resolved a series of work crises. Id. at 4. The study
found that men were rated both more competent and likeable, on average, even
when they resolved the crises in the same manner as did the women directors.
Id.
52
See Tinsley et al., supra note 51, at 4.
53
See Andrea E. Abele, How Gender Influences Objective Career Success
and Subjective Career Satisfaction: The Impact of Self-Concept and of Parenthood, in Gender Difference in Aspirations and Attainment: A Life Course
Perspective 412 (Ingrid Schoon & Jacquelynne S. Eccles eds., 2014).
54
Id.
55
Id.
56
Id.
57
Catherine Eckel et al., Gender and Negotiation in the Small: Are Women
(Perceived to Be) More Cooperative than Men?, 24 Negot. J. 429, 441–42 (2008).
50
51

2016]

Gender Differences in Negotiation

141

value on relationships. Research has shown that women tend to be
more collaborative when they negotiate because of the heightened
importance they place on interdependence.59 Some women may
focus more on trying to preserve their relationships with others
while negotiating, whereas men instead prioritize the final outcome
of the negotiation session.60 Thus, women may be more likely to
accept an equal split against a man opponent, even when the woman has a better bargaining position.61 Alternatively, other research
indicates that women engage in more collaborative negotiation
because they “value the very process of communication,” not necessarily because they seek to preserve relationships with opposing
parties.62 Regardless of their motivations, the evidence suggests
that women likely place too great an emphasis on the needs of the
opposing party in a negotiation session.
58

C.

Fairness, Reciprocity, and Trust in the Negotiation Process
Women may also be more inclined than men to emphasize
fairness when negotiating.63 This focus on achieving a mutually
58
Mark A. Boyer et al., Gender and Negotiation: Some Experimental Findings from an International Negotiation Simulation, 53 Int’l Stud. Q. 23, 27
(2009) (“[M]any psychologists conclude that, in general, women’s ‘self-schemas’ tend to be interdependent, while men’s tend to be independent.”).
59
Id. at 27 (“‘[W]omen often feel uncomfortable negotiating even in situations in which this type of controlled conflict is expected and appropriate,
because promoting conflict is foreign to their self-schemas and their sense of
identity.’”) (quoting Babcock & Laschever, supra note 5, at 119).
60
Boyer et al., supra note 58, at 27 (describing a recent study of students
engaged in a job negotiation that concluded “men are more likely to see the
‘instrumental’ side of negotiation [—] i.e., a focus on the outcome [—], while
women are likely to focus on the ‘interpersonal’ side, and thus the process rather than the outcome”). See also Lisa A. Barron, Ask and You Shall Receive?
Gender Differences in Negotiators’ Beliefs About Requests for a Higher Salary,
56 Hum. Rel. 635, 636–37 (2003).
61
See Charles B. Craver, The Impact of Gender on Negotiation Performance, 14 Cardozo J. Conflict Resol. 339, 350–51 (2013). (“Women tend
to value ‘equal’ exchanges, while men tend to desire ‘equitable’ distributions.
These different predispositions could cause female bargainers to accept equal
results even when they possess greater economic strength than their opponents,
while male negotiators strive for equitable exchanges that reflect pertinent
power imbalances.”).
62
Boyer et al., supra note 58, at 28 (“[W]omen may be more oriented toward cooperation because they value the very process of communication and
not necessarily because collaboration allows them to make and keep friends.”).
63
Eckel et al., supra note 57, at 441 (“The balance of evidence supports
the notion that women tend to be more egalitarian than men. Women in laboratory settings have been more likely to choose more equal distributions and
to stick with those preferences even when the cost of doing so increases. This
indicates that women may be more sensitive to men to issues of overall fairness

142

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 23.131

agreeable outcome can yield lower returns. Studies also show that
women are both more trusting than men, and also less likely to forgive the breaking of their trust.64 In the context of negotiations, this
suggests women may be more likely to trust that a low salary figure is offered in good faith based upon the employer’s budget and
other expenses.
In a study that tested a related hypothesis, women were found
to be more likely to engage in behaviors that promote reciprocity
than were men.65 Interestingly, while women tend to behave reciprocally as a way to reduce social distance from their opponent,
men often behave more reciprocally when at a high level of social
distance from a counterpart.66 “Social distance” is defined as the
degree of one’s familiarity and intimacy with another person, and
may be influenced by ethnic or social factors.67 Accordingly, women
may bring to the negotiation table an implicit focus upon developing and maintaining relationships through the negotiation process,
thereby favoring a collaborative outcome, which may harm their
short-term results. In salary negotiations, short-term salary gains
obtained through negotiation are important because future salary
progression is often related to wages offered by prior employers.68
D.

Public and Private Spheres as Gendered Realms
Third, gendered conceptions regarding public and private
spheres can work against women involved in salary negotiations.
Historically, men inhabited the public world of the traditional
workplace and politics, while women worked primarily within the
in negotiations, but the difference is negligible in many settings. On the other
hand, the evidence of a perception that women are fairer is robust, and care
should be taken in negotiations where fairness is an important issue. Because
women are expected to be fairer, a woman who plays hardball in settings in
which perceptions of fairness are important may be particularly unsuccessful.”).
64
Craver, supra note 61, at 347.
65
Boyer et al., supra note 58, at 29; see also Rachel Croson & Nancy Buchan, Gender and Culture: International Experimental Evidence from Trust
Games, 89 Am . Econ. Rev. 386, 389−90 (1999) (proposing that women are more
likely than men to display cooperative and reciprocal behavior).
66
See Weiss, supra note 11, at 263 (noting that “women’s positive reciprocity falls with the price of reciprocity and with their social distance from the recipient, and at high levels of social distance and price men are more generous”).
67
See Social Distance, Merriam-Webster Unabridged Dictionary (2015)
(defining social distance as “the degree of acceptance or rejection of social
intercourse between individuals belonging to diverse racial, ethnic, or class
groups”).
68
See generally David Matsumoto & Linda Juang, Culture and Psychology
412–13 (5th ed. 2013).

2016]

Gender Differences in Negotiation

143

private space of the home. Despite dramatic changes in workplace
demographics,70 these ingrained attitudes persist.71 For example,
men are, on average, still presumed to be more effective leaders
than women when partaking in activities occurring outside of the
home.72 Consequently, women’s perception of salary negotiation as
a traditionally male workplace activity can—whether consciously
or unconsciously—inhibit their endeavors in this realm.73 Relatedly, one study found that when the subject matter of negotiation
sessions was more traditionally feminine (such as crafts, beading,
and jewelry) women were able to negotiate as effectively as men.74
However, when the subject matter of negotiations was traditionally
masculine (like automobile manufacturing and racing), gender disparities in outcomes persisted.75 Thus negotiation topics associated
with the traditionally masculine workplace, such as salary metrics
69

Blau, supra note 2 (manuscript at 1–2).
Parker & Wang, supra note 4, at 10 (finding that “[t]he share of mothers
in the labor force increased sharply from 1975 to 2000. Only 39% of women
with children under the age of six were in the labor force in 1975, by 2000 the
share had risen to 65%.).
71
See Bowles & McGinn, supra note 43, at 8. See also Laura J. Kray et al.,
Battle of the Sexes: Gender Stereotype Confirmation and Reactance in Negotiations, 80 J. Personality & Soc. Psychol. 942, 945 (2001) [hereinafter Battle of
the Sexes] (hypothesizing that gender differences in negotiations would emerge
“only under threatening conditions—when the negotiation was perceived as
highly diagnostic of ability and gender stereotypes were linked to negotiation
success”). There, the authors designed a study whereby negotiation was either
designed as a learning tool or metric of negotiation ability. Id. at 944–45. The
authors hypothesized and found that women negotiated less effectively when
the outcome was deemed a product of negotiator ability. Id. at 945. See generally, Women “Take Care,” Men “Take Charge”: Stereotyping of U.S. Business
Leaders Exposed, Catalyst (2005), http://www.catalyst.org/knowledge/womentake-care-men-take-charge-stereotyping-us-business-leaders-exposed (outlining stereotypes affecting women leaders in the workplace and providing recommendations for how to address them).
72
Bowles & McGinn, supra note 43, at 4−5.
73
Riley & Babcock, supra note 40, at 6 (“Competitive bargaining is more
strongly associated with stereotypically masculine behaviors (e.g., being assertive, competitive, dominant, forceful, individualistic) than with stereotypically
feminine behaviors (e.g., being sensitive to the needs of others, soft-spoken,
sympathetic, understanding and yielding)”).
74
Julia B. Bear & Linda Babcock, Negotiation Topic as a Moderator of Gender Differences in
Negotiation, 23 Psychol. Sci. 743, 743–44 (2012). See Laura J. Kray et al.,
Gender Stereotype Activation and Power in Mixed-Gender Negotiations, IACM
15th Annual Conf. 4–5 (2002), http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.305011 (“women
were differentially affected by [male stereotypes] in terms of their aspirations,
opening offers, and negotiating agreements”).
75
Bear & Babcock, supra note 74, at 743-44.
69
70

144

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 23.131

or other pecuniary compensation, can in themselves be prejudicial
to women.76
E.

Perceptions of Power as Self-Fulfilling Prophecies
Another potential influence on negotiation outcomes is how
much power men and women feel they have over the final result,
which is often culturally influenced.77 According to the power theory, negotiators who perceive themselves as having more power78
typically have more ambitious goals for the negotiation session,
which can lead to better results for those negotiators.79 Women,
as members of a historically subjugated class, may perceive themselves to have less power than their male counterparts, leading to
worse negotiation outcomes.80
In sum, social norms and gender stereotypes work concomitantly to reduce women’s efficacy during salary negotiations in the
workplace. However, as discussed below, women can take several
affirmative steps to reduce the effects of these prejudices.
III. Overcoming Obstacles To Women’s Effectiveness During
Salary Negotiations
There are a number of strategies and tactics that women
might deploy during salary negotiations that may help them surmount the interior and exterior obstacles outlined above in order
to become more effective self-advocates during salary negotiations.
76
See id. (finding that the “conventional wisdom about gender differences
in negotiation may hold only with negotiations involving masculine issues”).
See also Sandra R. Farber & Monica Rickenberg, Under-Confident Women and
Over-Confident Men: Gender and Sense of Competence in a Simulated Negotiation, 11 Yale J.L. & Feminism 271, 283 (1999) (“Women . . . tended to feel less
confident than men when the assigned task was perceived as drawing on ‘male’
abilities, but not when the task was more ‘feminine’ in nature.”).
77
See Kray et al., supra note 74, at 4-5 (noting that cultural norms affect the
degree to which men and women associate themselves with power, that “the
power that a negotiator brings to the table has the ability to influence the division of resources and . . . [some] research suggests that men and women differ
in their propensity to exercise power”).
78
Id. at 3–4 (providing that “men are expected to exercise greater power
than women”).
79
See id. at 16 (concluding that their experiment demonstrated that “[e]ven
before the negotiators reached the bargaining table, high power negotiators set
more aggressive goals for themselves than low power negotiators. The pattern
of goals mirrored negotiation outcomes”); see also Laura J. Kray et al., Reversing the Gender Gap in Negotiations: An Exploration of Stereotype Regeneration,
87 Organizational Behav. & Hum. Decision Processes 386, 405 (2002); Battle
of the Sexes, supra note 71, at 942–43.
80
Battle of the Sexes, supra note 71, at 942–43.

2016]

Gender Differences in Negotiation

145

The following suggestions may strike some as unfair concessions
to a sexist reality; however, they are offered in the spirit of pure
pragmatism to those women who are concerned with being as effective at negotiating as possible within the imperfect circumstances in
which they find themselves.
A.

Women Can Become More Effective Self-Advocates During
Salary Negotiations by Expanding Comparison Metrics
During Salary Negotiations
First, women may be able to negotiate their salaries more
effectively by obtaining credible salary figures for comparative
positions. By doing thorough research online and via industry
publications, women can arm themselves with a fuller understanding of the value of their skills, which will likely enable them to be
better negotiators.
As discussed above, women are less inclined to enter into salary negotiations and are less aggressive than men when they do enter
negotiations. Women are in a cultural bind: being aggressive during
a negotiation may enable them to yield higher returns, but it could
also harm their likeability, which has real professional consequences. A negotiation strategy that relies heavily on reams of objective
data about what other people (particularly men) in similar positions are paid, women may be able to sidestep the aggression trap.
Furthermore, women are more likely to engage in negotiations when they believe their demands will be taken seriously and
they will not risk loss of social reputation. As discussed above, in
high-structural ambiguity negotiations—when there is no frame of
reference on which to base expectations—women have reduced
expectations and outcomes.81 Anchoring a negotiation strategy to
empirical data can reduce this tension. This tactic will be most helpful if women look beyond their immediate peer group for this information, and focus on the salaries offered to men in similar positions
possessing similar skills and credentials.82
Kaman & Hartel, supra note 19, at 185.
See Daniel J. Brass, Being in the Right Place: A Structural Analysis of Individual Influence in an Organization, 29 Admin. Sci. Q. 518, 518–19 (1984) (discussing the impact of social networks on power and influence). See also Bowles
and McGinn, supra note 43, at 9−10 (arguing disparities in pay expectations
will dissipate if men and women have access to the same information about pay
standards); Herminia Ibarra, Homophily and Differential Returns: Sex Differences in Network Structure and Access in an Advertising Firm, 37 Admin. Sci.
Q. 422, 441 (1992) (“[W]omen are likely to benefit from the development of
greater ties to their male colleagues. . . .”); Kaman & Hartel, supra note 19, at
193 (opining that “[w]e can change women’s expectations, therefore, by pointing out how their past pay experiences [—] in jobs they have held as students,
81
82

146

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 23.131

Similarly, women might consider that they are likely to be
entering into a salary negotiation less optimistic about the outcome
than is warranted. Such low expectations can detrimentally impact
their results.83 One way for women to overcome this cognitive bias
is to prepare a series of negotiation price points in advance, so that
when pressured they do not concede to a lower counter-offer too
readily. Instead, after an initial offer is rejected, a woman negotiator
would be prepared to offer the next lowest price point for which
she would be willing to settle.
Another tactic available to a woman negotiator who is concerned about coming across as confrontational is to phrase her
response to a low offer in the form of a question. For example, she
could ask why the initial salary offer compares unfavorably to average salaries earned by those in similar positions with analogous
credentials. Women job applicants could further ask whether the
salary offered is competitive with salaries offered by peer companies for their skill set within the region, and while so doing, could
provide the compensation figures that their competitors offer to
comparable employees.
A woman may also seek to neutralize the stigma attached to
aggressive behavior by making a point to reiterate communal goals
and motivations during a negotiation session, or to bolster her credibility by referencing an outside offer.84
for example [—] have reflected biases, by emphasizing the similarity of their
qualifications to those of their male counterparts, by encouraging them to discuss their expectations with male peers, and by helping them to get actual salary
figures on which to base their expectations and goals”); Brenda Major, Gender Differences in Comparisons and Entitlement: Implications for Comparable
Worth, 45 J. Soc. Issues 99, 112 (1989) (“The gender segregation of the work
force reinforces perceived distinctions between women and men, and between
women’s jobs and men’s jobs. It also promotes the perception that the sexes and
the jobs they do are dissimilar, limits access to cross-sex comparison others, and
hence inhibits cross-sex job comparisons.”).
83
See e.g., Mary Lou Santovec, Women and Negotiations: Don’t Wait to Be
Asked/Offered, 20:11 Women in Higher Educ. 29, 29-30 (Nov. 2011), http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/whe.10258/full (stating that “[w]omen’s perspectives on negotiations are less optimistic [than men’s]”).
84
Bowles & Babcock, supra note 47, at 30 (“For both male and female
evaluators, the expression of communal motives [—] alone [—] eliminated the
social costs to a female candidate of negotiating because it made her appear
relational and not because it made her appear deferential. For male evaluators,
the critical factor that undermined their willingness to work with female candidates who made pay requests based on an outside offer [—] as compared to
not negotiating [—] was the women’s perceived lack of relational concern.”).
See also Sometimes It Does Hurt to Ask, supra note 7, at 99 (examining “the
proposition that women encounter resistance when they attempt to negotiate
for higher compensation because such behavior is a status violation”).

2016]

Gender Differences in Negotiation

147

B.

Women Can Use Principled Negotiation Techniques During
Salary Negotiations to Make Their Counteroffers More
Effective
Second, women can avoid traditional negotiation styles that
present gendered obstacles, such as competitive bargaining, and can
instead rely on principled negotiation techniques. Traditional negotiation techniques often include a bargained-for exchange where
each party presents demands in excess of what either party intends
to accept, yet the rationale and principles for asking for a particular
demand garners little discussion.85 In contrast, principled negotiation techniques often include an approach whereby the goals of the
negotiation process and the rationale behind a particular demand
are emphasized over the actual figure itself.86
Due to disadvantages arising from gender stereotypes, principled negotiation techniques can be especially effective for women
negotiators, whose refusals to make concessions may not be received
as amiably as a man’s positional bargaining or competitive tactics.87
Women may need to pay special care to validate and explain the
reasons behind their positions in a negotiation proceeding. Articulating shared values helps women be more persuasive, and transforms an adversarial process into a collaborative, synergistic one.88
Shared values can often be phrased in terms of meeting goals pertaining to efficiency, profit, and leadership. Utilizing a shared values
approach in negotiation can help women to concurrently balance
authority and likeability, which may contribute to better outcomes.

85
James Kelleher, Review of Traditional and Collaborative Models for Negotiation, 29 J. Collective Negot. 321, 321–22 (2000).
86
See Roger Fisher et al., Getting to Yes: Negotiating Agreement without
Giving In 10–11 (2d ed. 1991) (outlining principled negotiation).
87
Amy Cohen, Gender: An (Un)Useful Category of Prescriptive Negotiation Analysis?, 13 Tex. J. Women & L. 169, 192 (2003) (“‘While both men and
women would benefit from learning [principled negotiation tactics], women
may need these skills more than men because of the conflicting expectations
they face when negotiating. Whereas men may be able to get away with competitive tactics some of the time, women may not.’”) (quoting Carole Watson,
Gender Versus Power as a Predictor of Negotiation Behavior and Outcomes, 10
Negot. J. 117, 125 (1994)).
88
Bowles & Babcock, supra note 47, at 37–38. See also Sometimes It Does
Hurt to Ask, supra note 7, at 99.

148

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 23.131

C.

In Order to More Effectively Self-Advocate During Salary
Negotiations, Women Can Use Gender Stereotypes to Their
Advantage
Third, women can leverage gender norms and stereotypes in
ways that work to their advantage, which may help to reduce disparities in negotiation outcomes among men and women.
Several studies have reviewed the comparative advantages women bring to negotiation settings. According to one study,
women bring four commonalities to the negotiating table: “(1) a
relational view of others, (2) an embedded view of agency, (3) an
understanding of control through empowerment, and (4) problem-solving through dialogue.”89 An embedded view of agency
means that women may be more likely to perceive themselves and
their relationships with others as supportive and mutually beneficial.90 Individuals with these capabilities bring unique, collaborative
perspectives to the negotiation process—a quality that women may
be able to use to their advantage by framing salary negotiations as a
problem-solving exercise.91 While men tend to be competitive, viewing the negotiation session as an opportunity to win, women are
more likely to perceive the negotiation as an opportunity to achieve
both parties’ goals, which potentially leads to creative solutions and
settlements.92 Women preparing for salary negotiations can consider the needs of the organization and the employer, and link these
needs with their salary demands.
Evidence suggests that women who are explicitly aware of
gender stereotypes may be able to leverage them to their advantage.93 “Stereotype threat” is a phenomenon that, applied to the
negotiation context, suggests that if stereotypes implicitly favor
male performance over females in a negotiation setting, then men
are likely to perform better.94 This is the logic of the self-fulfilling
Boyer et al., supra note 58, at 26–27.
Id. at 27.
91
Id. See also Deborah M. Kolb & Gloria G. Coolidge, Her Place at the
Table: A Consideration of Gender Issues in Negotiation, in Negotiation Theory
and Practice 261, 265, 269 (J. William Breslin & Jeffrey Z. Rubin eds., 1991)
(discussing gender differences).
92
Craver, supra note 9, at 272.
93
Craver, supra note 9, at 276. (“Male negotiators who take female opponents less seriously than they take male adversaries based upon gender-based
stereotypes provide their female adversaries with an inherent advantage. Since
they do not expect highly competitive or manipulative behavior from women,
they are less likely to discern and effectively counter the use of these tactics by
female opponents.”).
94
See Bowles & McGinn, supra note 43, at 8−9 (“[S]ubtle awareness of negative stereotypes about the performance abilities of one’s group in a domain
89
90

2016]

Gender Differences in Negotiation

149

prophesy. For example, one study found that informing participants that a certain gendered trait was necessary or advantageous
for optimal performance in the exercise ultimately provided an
independent advantage to the gender that possessed that trait.95
However, if these stereotypes are made explicit—for example, by
mentioning that women are not stereotypically thought to be formidable negotiators—the opposite occurs.96 Once these stereotypes
are openly acknowledged by the other party, women are able to
reduce the gender performance gap.97
Accordingly, one strategy for women negotiators who find
themselves being stereotyped is to make the opposing party aware
that he is making assumptions where none are warranted. Women
negotiators can bring gender bias to surface without being abrasive
by using gender-neutral descriptors and emphasizing genderless
goals with the opposing party. For example, instead of using “he”
or “she,” women negotiators could use terms such as “an individual” or “person” when referencing salary demands and price points.98
While the opposing party may not admit to stereotyping, he or she
is likely to internally re-evaluate these biases, which may help to
make the negotiation session more equitable.99 Moreover, women
can turn a situation with an opposing negotiator who assumes that
women negotiators are weaker, less skilled, or less competitive to
their advantage, as the negotiator relying on stereotypes may take

of personal importance—such as female managers in compensation negotiations—hangs like ‘a threat in the air’ that mentally taxes the individual and undermines performance.”). See also Claude M. Steele, A Threat in the Air: How
Stereotypes Shape Intellectual Ability and Performance, 52 Am. Psychologist
613, 622 (1997) (discussing stereotype threat).
95
Dorothy E. Weaver & Susan W. Coleman, The Literature on Women and
Negotiation: A Recap, 18 Dispute Resol. Mag. 13, 20 (2012).
96
Id.
97
Dean B. McFarlin et al., Predicting Career-Entry Pay Expectations: The
Role of Gender-Based Comparisons, 3 J. Bus. & Psych. 331, 339 (1989) (recommending that women “begin salary negotiations at career-entry with high, but
reasonable expectations, even if those expectations were based on wage rates
for higher paid male counterparts”).
98
See Bowles & McGinn, supra note 43, at 8 (“[E]xposing negotiators to
sex stereotypes favoring male performance in an implicit manner [—] i.e., below the level of conscious awareness [—] and telling them that their negotiation
performance would be evaluative of their general negotiation ability increased
the male advantage in negotiation performance in mixed-sex pairs.”). See also
Steele, supra note 94; Kray et al., supra note 74, at 11−13.
99
See Craver, supra note 61, at 347–48 (describing ways female negotiators
can respond to gender-based stereotypes).

150

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 23.131

the negotiation process less seriously than he or she otherwise
would.100
D.

Women Can Focus on Maintaining Consistent Verbal
Presentation and Social Cues
As an additional mechanism for offsetting implicit gender
bias, women can adjust their presentation, delivery, and mannerisms
during negotiation sessions in order to help maintain the authority
and credibility of their positions.
During negotiation proceedings, a woman is often more likely
to smile, nod her head, and generally exude warmth and friendliness.101 While doing so may be beneficial in generating client trust
in the workplace, these characteristics can also suggest less power
or credibility, and can reduce a woman’s effectiveness during salary negotiations.102 One study found that head nodding, smiling,
and other signs of agreement were associated with perceptions of
diminished power in negotiation settings.103 Consequently, women may benefit from carefully cultivating their voice, delivery, and
word choice. Researchers have also found that women are, on average, more prone to using ambiguous or filler terminology, including
phrases such as “you know,” “I think,” “but,” and “like,” than are
men, and that women’s speech tends to be less direct than men’s.104
Because women’s voices are often quieter than male voices, a woman negotiator’s argument or statement may not be considered as
forceful.105
Women seeking to reduce implicit gender bias associated
with certain mannerisms may choose to take special care to speak
more slowly and deliberately, as well as to employ appropriate use
of pauses and gestures, to maximize their perceived credibility and
power while negotiating.106 Ultimately, in trying to overcome gender bias, women may find it more effective to modify subtle behaviors and mannerisms, rather than amplify their assertiveness while
negotiating.107
Id. at 346–47.
See Marjorie Corman Aaron, Strategy at the Negotiation Table: From Stereotypes to Subtleties, 30 Int’l Inst. for Conflict Prevention & Resol.. 81, 83, 91
(Apr. 2012).
102
See id. at 91–92.
103
Id.
104
Craver, supra note 61, at 349–50.
105
See id. at 350.
106
Aaron, supra note 101, at 92. See also Robert Barton & Rocco Dal Vera,
Voice: Onstage and Off 18 (2011).
107
Bowles & Babcock, supra note 47, at 36 (“To be effective, women will
have to devise strategies that are authentic to their own personality and that fit
100
101

2016]

Gender Differences in Negotiation

151

In Certain Instances, Women Can Incorporate Technology In
Order Reduce Implicit Gender Biases During Salary Negotiations
Finally, in certain instances, some women may believe they
negotiate less effectively in face-to-face and interactive negotiation settings, thereby suggesting that women could benefit from the
increased use of telephone, audio-visual, and computer-based salary negotiations.108 In instances where a woman does not feel comfortable negotiating salaries in a face-to-face setting, one option
would be to suggest using technology such as Skype and phone
interviewing or conferencing in order to promote a smoother negotiation process.109
Conclusion
While legislative and social initiatives have made significant
strides toward promoting gender parity, the gender pay gap remains
due to persistent gendered cultural norms. Understanding and combatting gender differences during salary negotiations is yet another
way to help promote women’s equality in the workplace. Women’s
negotiation abilities ultimately affect many aspects of their lives,
including their careers, family life, as well as involvement in social
organizing and labor unions.110 Developing an understanding of
how women and men differ in their negotiation strategies, and
working to neutralize these disparities may provide an additional
tool in helping to finally close the gender pay gap.

the norms and culture of their organizational environment and the interpersonal context of the negotiation.”). See also Marvin B. Scott & Stanford M. Lyman,
Accounts, 33 Am. Soc. Rev. 46, 58−59 (1968) (describing the strategy involved in
choosing identities advantageous to bargaining situations).
108
Cf. Kaman & Hartel, supra note 19, at 185.
109
Bowles & McGinn, supra note 43, at 18. See generally, David Allen Larson, Technology Mediated Dispute Resolution (TMDR): Opportunities and
Dangers, 38 U. Toledo L. Rev. 213 (2006) (outlining advantages and concerns
associated with video and technology-assisted negotiations).
110
Boyer et al., supra note 58, at 27. See generally, Nicole Buonocore Porter,
Women, Unions, and Negotiation, 14 Nev. L. J. 465 (2014) (discussing women’s
reluctance to negotiate as a causal factor for low female membership in labor
unions).

