ARTICLES
MARGINALIZATION AND DIVESTMENT:
THE EFFECTS OF RELOCATING
THE LOS ANGELES WOMEN’S JAIL
Daniel Johnson*
Table of Contents
Introduction.......................................................................................43
I.
Defining the Issue....................................................................45
A. The Prison Industrial Complex..........................................47
B. Visitation as a Right.............................................................50
C. The Incarcerated Population of the L.A. County Women’s
Jail.........................................................................................54
II. Reevaluating the Issue: Community Concerns...................57
A. A Larger Community Impact.............................................57
B. Community Concerns About Health and Safety Issues...58
C. The Environmental Report.................................................60
III. Contextualizing the Issue: Financial Stakeholders........61
A. Parties Interested and Invested in Relocation Efforts.......61
B. The Community Surrounding CRDF................................62
IV. Possible Solutions and Further Actions............................64
A. An Obvious Solution to Relocation Issues is Too Little,
Too Late................................................................................64
B. Community Efforts Should Guide the Way Forward.......66
Conclusion..........................................................................................68

Introduction
This Article discusses the recent attempt to relocate the
Los Angeles Women’s Central Jail from Lynwood, California, to
Juris Doctor 2019, UCLA School of Law. I would like to thank Professors Scott Cummings and Victor Narro for supporting this project, the D
­ avid
J. Epstein Program in Public Interest Law and Policy and the Critical Race
Studies Program at UCLA School of Law for providing further opportunities
for research, and Professor Sharon Dolovich for providing guidance regarding
issues of post-conviction law and conditions of confinement.
*

© 2019 Daniel Johnson. All rights reserved.

43

44

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

Vol. 26.43

the defunct Mira Loma Detention Facility in Lancaster, California. The relocation efforts lasted several years, engendering strong
responses from both members of the public and county actors.
The relocation efforts recently resulted in a surprising victory for
community members and organizers when the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors voted to halt the already approved plans
to relocate to the Mira Loma facility.1 This Article represents an
attempt to analyze the context in which the relocation efforts took
place, starting with a look at the larger prison and jail system containing the facility, moving onto a more focused look at issues facing
incarcerated women, and finally expanding to include an analysis
of the systemic and community actors invested in the relocation.
The complex and opposing issues raised by community members and county officials remain important context for any future
efforts to relocate the women of the Century Regional Detention
Facility. Arguments raised by concerned community members cautioning that a relocation would have deleterious effects upon the
incarcerated women and their loved ones, as well as the communities surrounding the current facility in Lynwood, are still valid.
Similarly, concerns expressed by officials that the current facility
is not suited to address the needs of the incarcerated women, and
that a relocation would create a more hospitable environment for
inmates, remain relevant.
The Article will shed light on the issues implicated by the
relocation of the current facility and the women housed within it,
including both legal and practical hurdles for the parties involved.
The research for this Article began as an effort to illuminate the
negative effects upon the community most affected by the relocation—the women housed within the Century Regional Detention
Facility. I focused upon this population because they most easily fit
into the legal framing of constitutional harm; however, an increasing number of parties affected by the relocation became salient as
the project continued. As I learned more about the interconnected
nature of the issues implicated by the relocation, I began to follow
the lead of community activists to expand the list of the negative
impacts and externalities affecting a broader range of parties. Any
1. The final vote on the relocation was held on February 12, 2019, during
the editing process of this Article, but the larger effort regarding the current
facility and potential future relocation efforts is not over. For a brief overview
of the final decision to cancel plans to relocate to the Mira Loma Detention
Center in Lancaster, California, see Martin Macias Jr., LA County Strikes Down
Plans for Women’s and Mental Health Jail, Courthouse News Service (Feb.
12, 2019), https://www.courthousenews.com/la-county-strikes-down-plans-forwomens-and-mental-health-jail [https://perma.cc/5Q92-VNSW].

2019

Relocating the Los Angeles Women’s Jail

45

future relocation efforts must similarly cast a wide net to identify
affected parties and must also address a diverse network of issues
brought forth in the fight for the Mira Loma relocation. The Article will proceed as follows: Part I will discuss the relocation of the
jail facility through the experiences and harms associated with the
women currently incarcerated within the Century Regional Detention Facility, Part II will expand the scope of the issues impacted
by the relocation through the lens of community members, Part III
will discuss the parties financially invested in the relocation of the
facility, and Part IV will continue with a forward-looking discussion
of the current state of the Century Regional Detention Facility and
the tactics used by JusticeLA to stop the relocation.

I.

Defining the Issue

In 2016, the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors (Board
of Supervisors) approved the relocation of the Los Angeles County Women’s Jail from the city of Lynwood to the city of Lancaster.2
This relocation was intended to move the population of the Century Regional Detention Facility (CRDF) in Lynwood, California,
to the repurposed Mira Loma Detention Center (Mira Loma) in
Lancaster, California. This represented a substantial physical relocation for the women in CRDF. CRDF is located at a central point
of Los Angeles County, nearby a large concentration of the county’s population and accessible from several street and freeway
routes.3 Mira Loma, in contrast, is at the farthest reaches of the
county, decentralized from the majority of the county’s population
and only accessible by two heavily impacted routes.4 The distance
between the two facilities (roughly ninety miles) would have had
2. City News Service, County Votes to Move Forward with Women’s Jail
in Lancaster, The Antelope Valley Times (Oct. 26, 2016), http://theavtimes.
com/2016/10/26/county-votes-to-move-forward-with-womens-jail-in-lancaster
[https://perma.cc/5ZYC-AG8F].
3. See Century Regional Detention Facility, Google Maps, https://www.
google.com/maps/place/Century+Regional+Detention+Facility/@33.8312818,118.188878,10.66z/data=!4m5!3m4!1s0x0:0xeab86bdda799a8c2!8m2!3d33.9281
097!4d-118.227439.
4. See Driving Direction from Century Regional Detention Facility to
Mira Loma Detention Center, Google Maps, https://www.google.com/maps
(follow “Directions” hyperlink; then search starting point field for “Century Regional Detention Facility” and search destination field for “Mira Loma
Detention Center”) [https://perma.cc/46FD-7X42]; see also Population Density, L.A. Times, http://maps.latimes.com/neighborhoods/population/density/­
neighborhood/list [https://perma.cc/R9RT-W8Q2] (showing that Lynwood is a
highly populated region in the county, and that the regions surrounding and
including Lancaster rank amongst the lowest populated regions in the county).

46

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

Vol. 26.43

a significant effect upon the amount of time to commute for visitation from most parts of Los Angeles County—a commute time
which would have been further compounded by the ubiquitous
nature of Los Angeles traffic.5
Upon learning of the relocation to the new facility, I identified
the women housed in CRDF as the community who would be the
most negatively impacted due to restricted access to visitation. The
remote location of the Mira Loma facility would make visitation
more costly and time consuming, requiring many family members
and loved ones to travel farther and dedicate even more resources
than already required to stay in contact with incarcerated women.6
Compounding this effect is the fact that the vast majority (80 percent) of women in jails are mothers7 and incarcerated women are
also disproportionately low-income.8 Even if unintended, the physical distance itself presented a limiting factor—access to children
and supportive family members would likely be affected, with the
increased costs having greater impact upon low-income women and
their families.9 Simultaneously, the nature of incarceration meant
that the women at CRDF had no way to independently mitigate the
effects upon visitation—a complete lack of both mobility and input
in the decisionmaking process translated to the effective disenfranchisement of the women being relocated.
In contrast to the negative effects upon the women in CRDF
listed above, the narrative presented by the Los Angeles Sheriff’s
Department (LA Sheriff) presented some compelling reasons to
support the relocation. As described by the LA Sheriff, the new
facility was intended to be a “gender-responsive facility” with rehabilitative and education programs targeted towards women and
5. Google Maps, supra note 4.
6. See generally Aleks Kajstura, Women’s Mass Incarceration: The Whole
Pie 2018, Prison Pol’y Initiative (Nov. 13, 2018), https://www.prisonpolicy.org/
reports/pie2018women.html [https://perma.cc/RJM4-EHYN] (discussing the
already expensive and limited nature of visitation for women in jails including,
but not limited to, expensive phone calls and restricted access to physical letters
and mail).
7.
Wendy Sawyer & Wanda Bertram, Jail Will Separate 2.3 Million
Mothers from Their Children This Year, Prison Pol’y Initiative (May 13, 2018),
https://www.prisonpolicy.org/blog/2018/05/13/mothers-day-2018 [https://perma.
cc/2FWN-PTX3].
8. Bernadette Rabuy & Daniel Kopf, Prisons of Poverty: Uncovering
the Pre-Incarceration Incomes of the Imprisoned, Prison Pol’y Initiative (Jul.
9, 2015), https://www.prisonpolicy.org/reports/income.html [https://perma.cc/
K7SN-UDQM].
9. See Kajstura, supra note 6 (showing that women incarcerated in jails
are disproportionately susceptible to mental health issues resulting in high
rates of suicide).

2019

Relocating the Los Angeles Women’s Jail

47

increased access to contact visitation.10 These changes would facially benefit the population of CRDF but, while the move towards a
more positive and supportive facility by the LA Sheriff is a step
in the right direction, the discussion of these benefits neglected to
address the aforementioned ways in which the physical location of
the new facility would practically inhibit visitation—and therefore
inhibit rehabilitation—in ways that are particularly damaging to
incarcerated women.11
While I premise that the physical location of Mira Loma inherently inhibited access to visitation, the intended location was only
one part of a much bigger picture. Concerns regarding the relocation built upon institutional and systemic issues inherent in our
carceral system. The nature of incarceration in the United States is
fraught with concerns of abuse and dehumanization, which thereby enhances the need for access to family and community through
visitation. Accordingly, it is crucial that any discussion of relocation start with a look at the system within which these women are
incarcerated.12
Part I will continue in Subpart A with a brief discussion of
the history of the Prison Industrial Complex. Subpart B will follow
with an overview of the current case law addressing the right to visitation. Subpart C will then focus upon issues specifically facing the
women incarcerated in the Lynwood facility.
A.

The Prison Industrial Complex

The carceral system in the United States was shaped to extend
the systems of abuse and dehumanization used to control slave populations in the pre–emancipation era of the United States.13 After
10. Mira Loma Women’s Detention Center: Item No. 22, L.A. Cty. Dep’t
of Pub. Works (2016), http://file.lacounty.gov/SDSInter/bos/supdocs/108640.
pdf [https://perma.cc/5RDW-KB8C].
11. See infra Part I.C, for a continued discussion of the unique effects of
access to (or lack of) visitation rights for incarcerated women.
12. While I believe that a review of the pertinent historical and legal
backdrop is necessary to contextualize the issues presented by the relocation,
I also find it imperative to recognize that these issues are complex and intersectional. I will not be able to provide a comprehensive discussion of these
systems in the space provided in this Article and will instead focus on a tailored
overview of the most relevant aspects of the development of our current carceral system.
13. This is not to say that the racialized extraction of labor was the sole
reason for the creation of prisons, thought it was a major motivating factor in
the development of our penological institutions. See Douglas A. Blackmon,
Slavery by Another Name: The Re-Enslavement of Black Americans from
the Civil War to WWII 50 (2009) (detailing the development of convict leasing out of the industrialization of slavery leading up to emancipation); see also

48

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

Vol. 26.43

the abolition of slavery—and the resultant loss of a controlled and
inexpensive working force—states began to rely upon labor from
convict leasing programs to supplement the diminished workforce.14 These institutionalized methods of extracting labor were so
foundational to our systems of punishment that they were memorialized and amended into the United States Constitution.15 Under
an exception to the Thirteenth Amendment’s abolition of slavery
and slave labor, convicted and incarcerated people can be pressed
into service without pay or other compensation.16 This exemption
from the abolition of forced labor created a perverse incentive for
the collection of human bodies as a cheap labor resource through
our judicial system.17 Historic examples of the enactment of systems
supporting this perverse incentive can be seen in the development
of the arbitrary legal violations of Black Codes—laws created to
police and control Black bodies—and the establishment of institutions like Parchman Farm, a prison which continued to extract
labor from Black populations well after the official end of slavery.18
Over time the prison labor systems became profitable enough to
evolve from convict leasing to an entire system of mass incarceration—a system which encompasses a substantial sector of our
economy.19 Our prison population has since boomed to become the
largest in the world.20 As a nation we amount to roughly 5 percent
13th (Kandoo Films 2016) (outlining the system of prison labor arising out of
the end of slavery and the establishment of the Thirteenth Amendment to the
United States Constitution).
14. Christopher R. Adamson, Punishment After Slavery: Southern State
Penal Systems, 1865–1890, 30 Soc. Problems 555, 565 (1983); see also Michelle
Alexander, The New Jim Crow 28 (2010) (describing the development of
prison systems as an effort to supplement workforce and control Black labor);
David M. Oshinsky, Worse than Slavery 16–22 (1996) (showing the need in
Post–Emancipation Mississippi to establish a new method of controlling freed
slaves—the Black Codes).
15. See U.S. Const. amend. XIII, § 1 (stating “[n]either slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall have
been duly convicted, shall exist within the United States, or any place subject to
their jurisdiction”) (emphasis added).
16. Id.
17. See Alexander, supra note 14.
18. See Oshinsky, supra note 14, at 109 (detailing the establishment and
plantation-like conditions of the Parchman Farm).
19. For a detailed breakdown of many of the hidden costs and profiteers
tied into the mass incarceration system, see Peter Wagner & Bernadette Rabuy,
Following the Money of Mass Incarceration, Prison Pol’y Initiative (Jan. 25,
2017), https://www.prisonpolicy.org/reports/money.html [https://perma.cc/
YN36-C59G].­
20. See Highest to Lowest—Prison Population Total, World
Prison
­
Brief
(2014),
http://www.prisonstudies.org/highest-to-lowest/

2019

Relocating the Los Angeles Women’s Jail

49

of the world’s population; however, staggering increases in prison
population have resulted in U.S. prison population accounting for
25 percent of the world’s incarcerated population.21 This trend is
especially impactful for women as the population of incarcerated
women has increased at rates unmatched in any other incarcerated population.22 The populations most affected by these trends in
mass incarceration and prison labor are often of lower economic
status and are disproportionately people of color.23
This massive increase in prison population has coincided with
a correlated increase in our jail populations.24 Individuals introduced into the prison population often first travel through the jail
system as pretrial detainees. As mentioned above, the populations
most affected by the surge in incarceration in the United States
often have less access to economic resources. This includes a lack
of free capital to spend on legal fees and bail. As a result, low-income individuals assigned bail often spend time in the jail system
leading up to their trial. This process has resulted in particularly
prison-population-­total?field_region_taxonomy_tid=All [https://perma.cc/2747AADZ].
21. Michelle Ye He Lee, Does the United States Really Have 5 Percent
of the World’s Population and One Quarter of the World’s Prisoners?, Wash.
Post (Apr. 30, 2015), https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/fact-checker/
wp/2015/04/30/does-the-united-states-really-have-five-percent-of-worlds-­
population-and-one-quarter-of-the-worlds-prisoners/?noredirect=on&utm_
term=.ae8038affa0c [https://perma.cc/U4E6-SGLQ].
22. Robert Valencia, Incarcerated Women, the Fastest-Growing Population Behind Bars, Face Unique Challenges, Newsweek (Oct. 20, 2017), https://
www.newsweek.com/incarcerated-women-fastest-growing-population-unique-­
challenges-688968 [https://perma.cc/5YNN-VHR6] (showing that incarceration
rates for women have outpaced the growth rates of male incarceration by more
than 50 percent between 1980 and 2014). See also Wendy Sawyer, The Gender
Divide: Tracking Women’s State Prison Growth, Prison Pol’y Initiative (Jan. 9,
2018), https://www.prisonpolicy.org/reports/women_overtime.html [https://perma.cc/4GWF-VLDW].
23. Abram, supra note 2.
24. Prisons and jails are technically separate institutions which serve
different purposes. Prisons are generally for housing incarcerated individuals
convicted of more serious crimes who are serving a sentence longer than one
year. Inmates in prison are often incarcerated for significantly more time than
individuals in jails. Jails house both convicted inmates and pretrial detainees.
Convicted inmates in jails are generally serving less time than in prisons (shorter than one year sentences), while detainees are often not convicted but may
not have been able to pay bail after arrest. A significant number of individuals
in the Los Angeles jail system are detainees not convicted of any crime. See Jim
McDonnell, Custody Division Quarterly Report July–September 2018, L.A. Cty.
Sheriff’s Dep’t (June 22, 2019), http://www.la-sheriff.org/s2/static_­content/
info/documents/Custody_Third_Quarter_Report_2018.pdf (showing 44 percent pretrial population in the LA Jail system for the third quarter of 2018).

50

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

Vol. 26.43

devastating effects in the Los Angeles County Jail system, our
nation’s most populous jail system.25 Historically, the bail system
in California has been particularly expensive.26 Recent numbers
showed median bail as much as five times higher in California than
in other states (at a $50,000 median),27 with the highest portion of
incarcerated people in the jail system facing bail fees ranging from
$100,001 to $1,000,000.28 As a result, a large number of individuals
find themselves unable to pay their bail and are forced to remain
in the jail system even though they have not been convicted of a
crime. The massive jail population evidenced in Los Angeles is the
foreseeable result of these historic trends in the economic realities
of punishment—saddling low-income individuals with exorbitant
bail and fees unsurprisingly results in an oversaturated jail system.
The upward swing in prison and jail populations has resulted in an
increasing population burden on our jail systems, with disparate
impact in women’s jails.29
B.

Visitation as a Right

The arch of case law focused upon inmates’ rights reinforces
the already apparent inequities in enforcement and incarceration
discussed above. Explicit recognition of the secondary legal status of prisoners can be seen as early as the nineteenth century in
the case of Ruffin v. Commonwealth.30 As a previously convicted
inmate, Ruffin was put to work on the Chesapeake and Ohio Railroad as a form of convict leasing.31 While engaged in this work,
25. Breeanna Hare & Lisa Rose, Pop. 17,049: Welcome to America’s Largest Jail, CNN (Sept. 26, 2016, 8:53 AM), https://www.cnn.com/2016/09/22/us/
lisa-ling-this-is-life-la-county-jail-by-the-numbers/index.html [https://perma.
cc/2UDA-WZ3F].
26. I note that the bail system in California has historically been onerous
and expensive. As a result, Californians recently voted to end their bail system.
See Antonia Blumberg & Nick Wing, California Becomes First State to Pass
Law Ending All Use of Money Bail, Huffington Post (Aug. 29, 2018), https://
www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/california-ends-money-bail_us_5b85b33ae4b0cf7b002fc7b3 [https://perma.cc/JW27-PTBG].
27. Sonya Tafoya, Pretrial Detention and Jail Capacity in California,
Pub. Pol’y Inst. of Cal. (July 2015), https://www.ppic.org/publication/pretrial-­
detention-and-jail-capacity-in-california [https://perma.cc/Y4TL-N32].
28. Jim McDonnell, Custody Division Year End Review 2016, L.A. Cty.
Sheriff’s Dep’t (Mar. 22, 2018), http://www.la-sheriff.org/s2/static_content/
info/documents/PMB_YER2016.pdf [https://perma.cc/97KZ-DR5Q].
29. See infra Part I.C (discussing the breakdown of the population in
CRDF and the Los Angeles County Jail system). See also Kajstura, supra note
6 (showing that women convicted of crimes are disproportionately placed in
jails rather than prisons).
30. Ruffin v. Commonwealth, 62 Va. (21Gratt.) 790 (1871).
31. Id. at 791–92.

2019

Relocating the Los Angeles Women’s Jail

51

Ruffin allegedly killed one of the guards in an attempt to escape.32
Ruffin was caught, subsequently tried and convicted, and ultimately sentenced to hang.33 Though the crime occurred in the County
of Bath, Ruffin’s trial occurred in the County of Richmond, allowing Ruffin to challenge his conviction based upon venue.34 Ruffin
asserted that his conviction should be overturned because he had
the Sixth Amendment right to a trial in the jurisdiction in which
the crime took place;35 however, the court refused to acknowledge
Ruffin’s Sixth Amendment rights. Instead, the court announced
that convicted and incarcerated criminals do not have access to the
same rights recognized for other individuals. In the words of the
Supreme Court of Appeals of Virginia:
For the time being, during his term of service in the penitentiary, he is in a state of penal servitude to the State. He has, as a
consequence of his crime, not only forfeited his liberty, but all
his personal rights except those which the law in its humanity
accords to him. He is for the time being the slave of the State.36

The words “slave of the state” are emblematic of the historic
predatory nature of incarceration and have continued to reverberate throughout the jurisprudence delineating inmates’ rights.37
The characterization of incarcerated people as a population
without rights has resulted in a jurisprudence which often views
constitutional protections as optional privileges for incarcerated
individuals—an ideology which can pose an incredible barrier to
legal claims of basic rights.38 As a result, many rights presumed for
free individuals are not clearly established for incarcerated people.
Outside of clearly established and recognized protections against
cruel and unusual punishment,39 many other rights—such as the
right to visitation—have remained in legal limbo.
32. Id. at 792.
33. Id.
34. Id.
35. Id.
36. Id. at 796.
37. For a detailed modern exposition of the ideology supporting the notion that inmates do not inherently have constitutional protections (aside from
the protection against cruel and unusual punishment), see Overton v. Bazzetta,
539 U.S. 126, 139 (2003) (Clarence, J., concurring). Justice Thomas outlines the
idea that outside of Eighth Amendment protections, inmates are only guaranteed the constitutional protections that a state chooses to allow at sentencing.
Theoretically, this can be taken to mean that prisoners do not enjoy equal protection rights, due process rights, nor any other rights incorporated under the
Fourteenth Amendment, resulting in a true second-class status for incarcerated
people, in line with the theory presented in Ruffin.
38. Id.
39. U.S. Const. amend. VIII.

52

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

Vol. 26.43

The right to visitation is one of the rights which is not clearly established for prisoners and detainees. The right to visitation
arguably falls within the set of rights protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution40 through the right to
association.41 This right includes a protection to engage in intimate association and familial relationships, such as those expressed
through jail visitation with family members.42 Unfortunately, the
U.S. Supreme Court dealt a heavy blow against the right to associate in jail in their decision in Block v. Rutherford.43
In Block, inmates at the Los Angeles County Central Jail
brought suit against the Los Angeles County Sheriff for a policy prohibiting contact visitation with spouses, relatives, children,
and friends.44 In response, prison officials argued that jail security militated in favor of restricting visitation.45 While the District
Court acknowledged that “the danger of permitting low security
risk inmates to have ‘physical contact with their loved ones’ was
not sufficiently great to warrant deprivation of such contact,”46 the
Supreme Court held that “the Constitution does not require that
detainees be allowed contact visits when responsible, experienced
administrators have determined, in their sound discretion, that such
visits will jeopardize the security of the facility.”47 In other words,
jails are neither required to offer contact visitation for detainees,
nor are they prohibited from banning all contact visitation, so long
as the prison officials determine that there is a security risk. This is
an extremely low bar, which functionally leaves prison officials with
the complete discretion to end contact visitation.
Restrictions upon visitation were further expanded for convicted prisoners in Overton v. Bazzetta.48 In Overton, prisoners
contested a set of visitation restrictions implemented by Michigan
state prison officials. The prisoners in Overton were already denied
contact visitation was because of their high security status. However, Michigan state prison officials went further and established
a policy that prohibited visitation by individuals falling into several categories: any minor children without a guardian; any inmate’s
40. U.S. Const. amend. I.
41. Kenneth L. Karst, The Freedom of Intimate Association, 89 Yale L.J.
624 (1980) (detailing the right to association and the derivation of the right to
intimate association).
42. Id.
43. Block v. Rutherford, 468 U.S. 576 (1984).
44. Id. at 578.
45. Id.
46. Id.
47. Id. at 589.
48. Overton v. Bazzetta, 539 U.S. 126 (2003).

2019

Relocating the Los Angeles Women’s Jail

53

children in which the inmate has lost parental rights; any children
who are not the child, stepchild, grandchild, or sibling of the inmate
(excluding nieces, nephews, etc.); and any former prisoners who are
not in the inmates’ immediate family and preapproved by the warden to visit.49 The policy also barred all visitation for two years for
inmates who committed drug violations while incarcerated.50 Similar to Block, officials argued that less restrictive visitation measures
presented a greater security risk for the facility.51
Even though these visitation policies were much more stringent than the policy in Block, the Supreme Court held that each
restriction is constitutional in light of the concerns of the prison
officials.52 Further, the court stated that:
[O]utside the prison context, there is some discussion in our
cases of a right to maintain certain familial relationships,
including association among members of an immediate family
and association between grandchildren and grandparents. This
is not an appropriate case for further elaboration of those matters. The very object of imprisonment is confinement. Many
of the liberties and privileges enjoyed by other citizens must
be surrendered by the prisoner. An inmate does not retain
rights inconsistent with proper incarceration.53

These words echo the same sentiment as Ruffin’s “slaves of
the state,” serving to undercut any right to association for prisoners. While the court did not explicitly state that prisoners had no
right to association, the court continued to state, “as our cases have
established, freedom of association is among the rights least compatible with incarceration.”54 Though the court explicitly refrained
from deciding whether visitation is a right which survives incarceration, the court all but gutted any protections related to prisoners’
visitation rights.55
Taken together the decisions in Block and Overton present a
bleak reality for the women incarcerated at CRDF. CRDF includes
pretrial detainees and convicted prisoners, and the protections of
the right to association have been undercut for both groups. To
make matters worse, the Block decision specifically justified the
no-contact visitation policies in the Los Angeles County jail system. It would be straightforward for the LA Sheriff to argue that
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.

Id. at 129–30.
Id. at 130.
Id. at 129.
Id. at 133–34.
Id. at 131 (citations omitted).
Id.
Id.

54

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

Vol. 26.43

generous standards of visitation are not constitutionally required,
and therefore relocation efforts should proceed regardless of the
deleterious effects to visitation. The reality is that the women
incarcerated in CRDF may not have a legally protected right to
visitation, which highlights the importance of community-based,
nonlegal advocacy to ensure meaningful access to visitation.
C.

The Incarcerated Population of the L.A. County Women’s Jail

As discussed above, our prison and jail systems were not
originally implemented as an exercise in rehabilitation, nor was
our prison system constructed with concerns for the families and
children of incarcerated people at the forefront. However, many
incarcerated women are mothers whose incarceration affects their
relationships with their children. Historical and legal hurdles riddle the path of access to loved ones for incarcerated women, and
the practical realities of facilities further compound these effects.
The remoteness of facilities, the hostile visitation environments, the
expensive nature of phone calls, and many other factors combine
to degrade the relationships between an incarcerated mother and
her child, and can result in psychological trauma to the children.56
Further, the nontraditional structures of many families conflict with
the visitation policies as they were implemented in some facilities.
Many of the children reside with grandparents, with other family
members, or with foster care parents and caregivers.57 This creates
more barriers to visitation: Some of these caregivers are elderly,
and thus have limited mobility to travel to facilities housing incarcerated mothers, and some caregivers may have multiple children
for whom they care.58 The culmination of these qualities is that the
very nature of our prison and jail facilities are often inherently hostile towards the continued development of relationships between
incarcerated women and their family and children.
The contextual framing of longstanding issues in our prison industrial complex and the targeted effects it can have upon
women and families is important in understanding how and why
the proposed relocation of the jail would have created tangible
injury to the women incarcerated in the facility. Principally, the
56. Creasie Finney Hairston, Focus on Children with Incarcerated Parents, An Overview of the Research Literature, The Annie E. Casey Foundation,
(Oct. 2007), http://www.aecf.org/m/resourcedoc/aecf-FocusonChildrenwith_­nca
rceratedParentsOverviewofLiterature-2007.pdf [https://perma.cc/5855-YZ4H].
See also Dorothy E. Roberts, Criminal Justice and Black Families: The Collateral Damage of Over-Enforcement, 34 U.C. Davis L. Rev. 1005, 1016 (2001).
57. Roberts, supra note 56, at 1010–18.
58. Hairston, supra note 56, at 10.

2019

Relocating the Los Angeles Women’s Jail

55

issue of overpopulation would not have been solved by relocation to the proposed Mira Loma facility. The jails system in Los
Angeles is overpopulated with a daily incarcerated person population of 17,049.59 This has resulted in many jail facilities operating
over capacity.60 In particular, CRDF is over the facility’s maximum capacity by over 190 individuals (roughly 20 percent).61 This
equates to a daily population of 1,924 individuals housed in the current facility, a population whose housing needs would still not have
been met at the new Mira Loma facility whose proposed maximum
capacity is 1,604 individuals.62 As a result of an already overcrowded system, women who did not fall into the low- to medium-risk
categories would be shipped to other facilities.63
The women in CRDF already face current restrictions and
barriers to visitation. The visiting procedures at CRDF mirror
many of the issues previously mentioned in the context of the
prison industrial complex—particularly the hostile nature of the
facilities. CRDF was previously a high-security men’s carceral facility, prioritizing function and increased security over programming
and visitation.64 As a result, inmate visitation procedures are not
accommodating to visits from family and children. Scheduling is
inflexible, allowing for visitation only on Saturdays and Sundays.65
This restricts the available time for visitation such that visitors who
work on weekends will find it difficult to schedule time for visits.
Even when the visits can be scheduled, more procedures hamper
visitation. Like the jail in Block, all visitation at the facility is noncontact, with access only available through glass barriers.66 This
can create a hostile environment for children and erects physical
barriers to familial interaction.67 The visits are also available to children only if they are accompanied by a parent or guardian.68 Thus
59. Hare & Rose, supra note 24.
60. McDonnell, supra note 28.
61. Id.
62. Id.
63. BonTerra Psomas, Final Environmental Impact Report: Response
to Comments, Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program, and Revisions, Clarifications, and Corrections to the Draft EIR, Vol. 1 (2016), ftp://
dpwftp.co.la.ca.us/pub/PMD/MiraLomaWomenFacility/Final%20EIR.
64. McDonnell, supra note 28.
65. Century Regional Detention Facility Visiting Info, L.A. Cty. Sheriff’s
Dep’t, (Dec. 12, 2013), http://shq.lasdnews.net/content/uoa/AS1/­CRDCustodyvisitingInfo1.pdf [https://perma.cc/26H2-PE8N].
66. Information gleaned through personal call to Century Visitation Office information number.
67. Hairston, supra note 56, at 9.
68. L.A. Cty. Sheriff’s Dep’t, supra note 65.

56

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

Vol. 26.43

when the guardian or parent is unavailable, children cannot visit
with other available family members (such as older siblings, cousins,
aunts, or uncles) who are not their guardians.69
Additionally, there must be at least two adults to facilitate
a single trip with multiple children. Each visit is capped at two
individual visitors, and each child counts as one of the visitors,
regardless of their age. This strict limit means that a single guardian
caring for two or more visiting children must make multiple visits
to allow each child access to their mother.70 These visits are capped
at two in any given week, requiring any guardian caring for more
than two children to make return visits over several weeks to allow
all children to visit an incarcerated parent.71 To further complicate
matters, there is no daycare facility in CRDF.72 Because one parent
or guardian must enter each session with a child, a visiting guardian
with multiple children must either bring another adult to watch the
children in the waiting area, or separately arrange childcare for the
non-visiting children. The resulting situation is a mess of restrictions and regulations which hampers meaningful family visitation
at a fundamental level.
The proposed facility in Mira Loma would not have fixed these
visitation issues. Though there was little publicly available information on the visitation procedures to be implemented at Mira Loma,
some sources indicated that the new facility would include new
visitation centers to allow for contact visitation (a definite improvement over CRDF). However, these materials neglected to mention
the fact that the location alone would have prohibited visitation.73
The travel time to the proposed facility could amount to two and
a half hours each way in traffic from the location of the current
facility.74 This time could greatly increase with holiday traffic, and
would have been even longer for those who live farther south of the
current facility. Thus, those travelling to the new facility would likely have had to expend significantly more time for each scheduled
visit to Mira Loma. While new visitation procedures might have
resolved some of the issues with the current visitation system, the
physical remoteness of the new facility remained a significant barrier to visitation.

69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.

Id.
Id.
Id.
Id.
Mira Loma Women’s Detention Center: Item No. 22, supra note 10.
Google Maps, supra note 4.

2019

II.

Relocating the Los Angeles Women’s Jail

57

Reevaluating the Issue: Community Concerns

My initial concept of the relocation of the CRDF centered
around the incarcerated women and their access to their children
and loved ones through visitation. This painted a picture with a
significant negative impact upon the incarcerated women, but
it was an incomplete conceptualization of the issue. By looking
into the community opposition to the relocation, I realized that my
narrow view elided the negative externalities pushed onto communities outside of CRDF. This shortcoming became apparent
through analysis of community discussion with the Board of Supervisors. Community members did voice concerns about the effects
of reduced access to visitation, but they also raised many other
issues. It became apparent that the affected population included
not only the women in CRDF, but also family members of incarcerated women, anti-prison activists and abolitionists, local scientists
concerned with community welfare, and other community members from the areas in Lynwood that surround the current facility.
This was a larger and extended community who was both vocal and
invested in the decisionmaking process of the relocation, but whose
impact I failed to consider in my original evaluation. While not
every individual addressing the Board of Supervisors was directly
or personally affected by the relocation, they all shared concerns
intimately related to the relocation of the jail facility.
Part II of this Article will continue the discussion of the issues
raised by the larger community in effort to resist the relocation of
CRDF. Subpart A will provide context for the larger community
concerned with the relocation. Subpart B will discuss the health
and safety harms posed to incarcerated women as identified by
these community members. Subpart C will discuss the impact of the
environmental report addressing the concerns raised in Subpart B.
A.

A Larger Community Impact

Community members came out in full force against the relocation of the jail. At each Board of Supervisors meeting addressing
the potential relocation, community members gathered and waited patiently to be heard.75 At the meetings observed from October
2016 to October 2017, members of various community organizations attended in such large numbers that they overwhelmed the

75. Meetings On-Demand, L.A. Cty. Bd. of Supervisors, (Oct. 2016–Oct.
2017), http://bos.lacounty.gov/Board-Meeting/MediaArchive. Specifically, the
meetings I draw my analysis from are the October 25, 2016, November 1, 2016,
and September 26, 2017 meetings.

58

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

Vol. 26.43

meeting with the volume of their concerns.76 This caused the Board
of Supervisors to delay the vote on the relocation decision to later
meetings, and eventually resulted in open protest when the relocation was initially approved.77 Some organizations showed up in
hazmat suits to convey the environmental dangers of the relocation,
and many community members spoke of their own connections to
incarcerated family members or personal experiences of incarceration.78 Community members made concerted, organized efforts to
resist the relocation, waiting hours (sometimes as many as four or
five hours in a single meeting) for less than two minutes of speaking
time per person.79 The community actions in the meetings emphatically showed that community members were heavily invested and
that there was significant and diverse resistance to the relocation.
Throughout the course of the Board of Supervisor meetings,
community members began to coalesce into even larger coalitions.
In just a few months, community organizations who once spoke and
demonstrated independently, such as the Youth Justice Coalition
and LA No More Jails Coalition, joined with one another to create
a new larger coalition. The new coalition was called JusticeLA and
served as a unified front to connect almost fifty separate community organizations and activist member groups against the relocation
efforts.80 JusticeLA also included the support and guidance of
one of the founders of Black Lives Matter, Patrisse Cullors.81 This
new coalition forged a solid community grassroots opposition to
the county plans to expand the jails system, ultimately convincing
enough County Supervisors to switch their votes.82
B.

Community Concerns About Health and Safety Issues

Community members raised many other issues in addition to
those centered around access to visitation—some of which identified basic health and functionality concerns regarding the Mira
Loma facility. Members of community organizations and a doctor/
76. Id.
77. Susan Abram, Protesters Against New LA County Jail Shut Down
Board of Supervisors Meeting, L.A. Daily News (Aug. 28, 2017), http://www.
dailynews.com/2016/10/25/protesters-against-new-la-county-jail-shut-downboard-of-supervisors-meeting [https://perma.cc/2JGZ-864E].
78. Meetings On-Demand, supra note 75.
79. Id.
80. JusticeLA, http://justicelanow.org/about [https://perma.cc/HJ2DDK6P].
81. Id.
82. Id. See also Mancias, supra note 1 (explaining that the project was
opposed by a number of officials, including the Los Angeles County Sheriff and
the Sheriff Civilian Oversight Commission).

2019

Relocating the Los Angeles Women’s Jail

59

professor of microbiology specializing in desert soil microorganisms raised concerns regarding the soil at the Mira Loma facility.83
According to both the Microbiologist and another physician working with the CDC, the soil in and around the Mira Loma facility
harbors a fungus which could cause valley fever.84 Valley fever is
a noncurable disease caused by infection from a fungus found in
Antelope Valley—fungus which can become airborne through
disturbing the soil the spores are present in.85 Many community
members raised concerns that previous construction in the Antelope Valley had already disturbed the soil, increasing the risk of
individuals contracting valley fever.86 Some individuals also spoke
of cases where they or a close family member contracted valley
fever while incarcerated in similarly high-risk areas.87 Experts and
community members shared concerns that the construction at the
new facility would further increase risks of valley fever contraction
for any women moved to Mira Loma.88
While valley fever is nontransferrable between individuals,
those who become infected through the airborne fungal spores can
require extensive and prolonged treatment.89 Most cases of valley fever present themselves with cold- or flu-like symptoms. As
a result, the illness can go undiagnosed. Many people who contract the disease will recover without needing treatment; however,
as many as 40 percent of infected individuals require an expensive
hospital stay averaging $50,000 in costs and fees.90 Certain minority populations are at higher risk to contract the infection than other
groups, and a small portion of cases result in life-threatening lung
infections or spread to other areas of the body requiring indefinite
antifungal treatment.91 Only a small portion of those affected will
need continued treatment, but the treatment is potentially expensive and medications for the illness can have severe side effects.92
Additionally, those that need treatment can sometimes develop
complications that increase risk for other illnesses such as nodules;
ulcers and skin lesions; painful lesions in the skull, spine or other
83. Meetings On-Demand, supra note 75.
84. Id.
85. Id.
86. Id.
87. Id.
88. Id.
89. Valley Fever Awareness, Ctrs. for Disease Control and Prevention
(2018), https://www.cdc.gov/features/valleyfever/index.html [https://perma.cc/
KL5N-RR5J].
90. Id.
91. Id.
92. See id.; see also Meetings On-Demand, supra note 75.

60

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

Vol. 26.43

bones; painful, swollen joints, especially in the knees or ankles; and
meningitis (an infection of the membranes and fluid surrounding
the brain and spinal cord).93
In addition to the fungus that carries valley fever, community
members raised other environmental concerns regarding the soil of
Mira Loma, noting that the previous use of the facility might present harmful environmental effects.94 The Mira Loma facility sports
a long history as detention facility, at one time serving as the largest
immigration detention center in the country.95 Before becoming an
immigration detention center, Mira Loma was first an airfield and
then a series of criminal detention facilities.96 Community members pointed to the airfield as the culprit for contaminating the soil,
because at that time, fuel tanks were installed underground which
created a lasting risk of soil contamination.97 Community members
raised concerns that potential toxic contamination from leaking
fuel tanks posed a risk to the inmates that would be moved there.98
There were also concerns that the water system at the facility was insufficient to supply the expected population of the new
facility.99 The Mira Loma facility long sourced its water from a
ground water well, and community members raised concerns that
the well would not be sufficient to supply the needs of the proposed
expansions to Mira Loma.100 Community members argued that this
would have resulted in a potable water shortage for an inmate and
staff community located in the desert.101
C.

The Environmental Report

While the Sheriff’s Department did not respond to many of
the issues surrounding visitation, they did present some solutions to
the environmental concerns at the new location. The environmental
concerns raised by the community resulted in a temporary hold on
the project until an environmental report could clear the concerns
93. Symptoms and Causes of Valley Fever, Mayo Clinic, https://
www.­m ayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/valley-fever/symptoms-causes/­
syc-20378761 [https://perma.cc/GE8V-G8X6].
94. Meetings On-Demand, supra note 75.
95. Id.
96. Id.
97. Id.
98. See BonTerra Psomas, supra note 63, for a collection of community
letters expressing concerns over issues including soil contamination.
99. See id; Public Comment in Response to Environmental Impact Report,
L.A. No More Jails, https://lanomorejails.org/take-actionpast-actions [https://
perma.cc/72D8-LNWB].
100. BonTerra Psomas, supra note 63.
101. Id.

2019

Relocating the Los Angeles Women’s Jail

61

of the Board of Supervisors. While this was a temporary victory
for the community, the relocation team quickly instituted changes
to remove the temporary hold. These changes included: spraying
water on the dirt at the construction sites to prevent the dry top
layer of soil from blowing away with fungal spores carrying valley
fever, pledging to remove the old fuel tanks during the construction process, and contracting with a local Lancaster water company
to tie the facility into the city water grid.102 These changes proved
sufficient for the Board of Supervisors to move the project forward
over the objections of JusticeLA and other community members.

III. Contextualizing the Issue: Financial Stakeholders
In addition to the health and safety concerns, there were also
policy concerns raised by the financial stakes in relocation. Both
community members local to Lynwood and family members of
women incarcerated at CRDF identified that the funding of the
new facility was exorbitant.103 These concerns raised related questions regarding resource investment, and the potential divestment
of resources from the city and communities of Lynwood. In considering any next steps or solutions, it was essential to identify the
parties who would benefit or suffer financially from the relocation.
The parties detailed in this Part of the Article were a step removed
from the harms facing the incarcerated women, but they would likely be the parties facing the largest financial impact by a relocation
of CRDF. Moreover, these are the parties most likely to continue
to face similar economic consequences if there are future attempts
to relocate CRDF to a new location.
Subpart III.A will address parties financially incentivized by
relocating the current facility, and Subpart III.B will address the
communities negatively impacted financially by the relocation.
A.

Parties Interested and Invested in Relocation Efforts

Most of this Article has tackled the myriad negative effects
and externalities facing the women incarcerated at CRDF and
impacted communities. However, where one party will suffer the
consequences of the relocation, another will reap benefits. In this
case, the Los Angeles Sheriff’s Department was both the biggest
supporter of the relocation and perhaps its largest beneficiary. The
relocation was projected to include new programming, education
102. Meetings On-Demand, supra note 75. See also BonTerra Psomas,
supra note 63.
103. Meetings On-Demand, supra note 75. See also BonTerra Psomas,
supra note 63.

62

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

Vol. 26.43

opportunities, and facilities.104 These expansions presented the LA
Sheriff with an incentive to support the relocation because they
would have provided new job opportunities for the LA Sheriff’s
department to staff.105
The Department of Public Works also stood to benefit from
the construction of the Mira Loma facility.106 According to Public Works, they received $100 million in grant money to complete
construction to retrofit the Mira Loma facility to house the CRDF
population.107 This funding served as a motivating factor in the
Department of Public Works’ push to relocate CRDF because it
was contingent upon the work done to relocate CRDF to Mira
Loma.108 To further secure these funds, the Department of Public
Works worked in partnership with the LA Sheriff to adjust facility
plans to meet the bare minimum requirements of the environmental reports.109
B.

The Community Surrounding CRDF

While the LA Sheriff and the Department of Public Works
viewed the construction of the new facilities as an economic boon,
community members in Lynwood raised concerns that moving the
CRDF would extract needed resources from the city of Lynwood.
Community members from Lynwood highlighted that the funding
and investment in their communities was, and remains, inexcusably low and that resources committed to opening a new jail facility
should instead be used for the benefit and development of communities within the city.110
Community members from Lynwood raised concerns to
the Board of Supervisors that the millions of dollars in resources earmarked for Mira Loma would be better served as a tool to
develop their community, and the numbers support this assertion.
104. Meetings On-Demand, supra note 75. See also BonTerra Psomas,
supra note 63.
105. Meetings On-Demand, supra note 75. See also BonTerra Psomas,
supra note 63.
106. See Abby Sewell & Cindy Chang, L.A. County to Relocate Some Inmates, Build Jail to Treat the Mentally Ill, L.A. Times (Aug. 11, 2015), https://
www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-ln-jail-size-vote-20150811-story.html
[https://perma.cc/G6VV-M8LL].
107. Meetings On-Demand, supra note 75. See also Frequently Asked
Questions AB 900 Jail Construction Funding, Cal. State Ass’n of Counties,
http://www.counties.org/sites/main/files/file-attachments/ab_900_frequently_
asked_questions_from_cdcr_dec07.pdf [https://perma.cc/GF9J-UCG6] [hereinafter AB 900 Jail Construction Funding].
108. AB 900 Jail Construction Funding, supra note 107.
109. See BonTerra Psomas, supra note 63.
110. Id.

2019

Relocating the Los Angeles Women’s Jail

63

Compared to the rest of California districts, the economic status of
Lynwood is alarming. According to the most recent census, the per
capita income in Lynwood is roughly half the per capita income in
the rest of California, at about $16,000 versus $35,000 respectively.111 Lynwood suffers from disturbingly high poverty rates, with
roughly one-fifth of Lynwood citizens below the poverty line.112
Housing units in Lynwood are undervalued at only about 80 percent of the California housing unit value.113 Similar and worse
comparisons exist in attainment within education, as Lynwood has
only a 57.7 percent high school graduation rate (two-thirds of the
statewide California rate) and lower than 10 percent Bachelor’s
degree attainment rate (well below the statewide California rate of
33 percent).114
These numbers indicate that Lynwood would greatly benefit
from investment within the community, rather than an effort to use
$138 million to relocate a source of jobs and income away from the
city. Admittedly, the funds allocated for the relocation of CRDF
were earmarked for use in the jails system, but any new actions to
relocate CRDF should consider the immediate financial risk posed
to Lynwood communities. Educational programs and vocational
training funded by the state might benefit the community and combat this risk, as might higher paid employment opportunities. Any
future relocation of CRDF which does not consider the financial
impact upon Lynwood should similarly be criticized for providing
another example of Los Angeles County underserving the people
of Lynwood.
In response to these concerns, community members have
made several of their own suggestions for alternative uses of the
relocation funds, including increased implementation of child care,
resources for the development of community resources and infrastructure, resources for working mothers, and the use of locally
sourced therapists at the current Lynwood facility to revitalize the
local economy.115 The redistribution of funds flagged for relocation would benefit both communities in Lynwood surrounding the
111. Los Angeles County (South)—South Gate & Lynwood Cities PUMA,
CA, Census Reporter, https://censusreporter.org/profiles/79500US0603752los-angeles-county-south-south-gate-lynwood-cities-puma-ca [https://perma.
cc/PB5K-XHMU].
112. Id.
113. Id.
114. Id.
115. Meetings On-Demand, supra note 75. See also BonTerra Psomas, supra note 63.

64

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

Vol. 26.43

CRDF and could similarly be targeted at Los Angeles communities
disproportionately incarcerated within the CRDF.116

IV. Possible Solutions and Further Actions
As mentioned at the outset of this Article, the relocation to
Mira Loma was ultimately unsuccessful. Community members,
organizers, community organizations, and experts joined forces to
create coalitions which caused the Board of Supervisors to rethink
and eventually rescind their prior approval of the relocation. The
women of CRDF no longer have to fear relocation to Mira Loma,
but there are still unresolved issues surrounding CRDF and the
possibility of relocation remains an open question.
A.

An Obvious Solution to Relocation Issues is Too Little,
Too Late

Due to the inherent and projected issues with visitation at
the Mira Loma facility, the Board of Supervisors bent to community pressure and voted against the construction of the Mira Loma
Facility.117 While I applaud the boldness of the County Supervisors to respond to the arguments raised by their constituents, voting
against the relocation is only a stop-gap solution. The vote prevents
the complications to visitation raised by increased time, travel, and
expenses arising from the relocation, but it does not address the
problems inherent in the current visitation structure at CRDF.
Moreover, the vote did not include any alternative measures to
address the overpopulation issues at CRDF. These issues require
intensive reform of the strategies of imprisonment and a careful
rethinking of how to center visitation as a meaningful part of rehabilitative efforts.
Unfortunately, the current state of CRDF does not leave
the Board of Supervisors with several more years to come up with
another solution to these problems. The current facilities in CRDF
are well below acceptable standards for the care of incarcerated people.118 The current facility poses health risks, with a rotted
116. Id.
117. Elizabeth Marcellino, L.A. County Scraps Women’s Jail in Lancaster, OKs Downtown Treatment Center, L.A. Daily News (Feb. 12, 2019, 5:03
PM), https://www.dailynews.com/2019/02/12/l-a-county-scraps-womens-jail-in-­
lancaster-oks-downtown-treatment-center [https://perma.cc/PCS4-XRDD].
118. Susan Abram, Inside an LA County Women’s Jail ‘Busting at the
Seams’: Rotted Pipes, Overcrowding and a Plan to Relocate, L.A. Daily News
(Feb. 12, 2018, 9:31 AM), https://www.dailynews.com/2018/02/12/inside-an-lacounty-womens-jail-busting-at-the-seams-rotted-pipes-overcrowding-and-aplan-to-relocate [https://perma.cc/JJ27-QZN3].

2019

Relocating the Los Angeles Women’s Jail

65

plumbing system which causes sewage to back up within cells on a
regular basis.119 Access for disabled individuals is also at risk due
to failing and irreparable elevator systems.120 Additionally, the population in the jail includes an aging segment which has increased
health care needs and support.121 These issues will not disappear
simply because the relocation efforts have been stopped, nor will
the programming and less restrictive visiting procedures planned
for the Mira Loma facility become standard at CRDF without a
concerted effort by the county.
Neither will current efforts address conduct violating the
rights of incarcerated women unrelated to the relocation, such as
allegations of sexual violations and determinations that CRDF is
not in compliance with the federal Prison Rape Elimination Act
(PREA).122 An independent review of the women’s facilities found
the jail’s policies identifying likely victims of sexual abuse were
inadequate, officials would not provide documentation to show
that they have not hired individuals with a history of sexual misconduct, and the complaint system for inmates to report sexual
abuse was ineffective.123 Some of the reporting mechanisms were
broken (e.g., reporting lines unconnected, emailing services for
third party reporting not functioning).124 Further, the county does
not have accurate mechanisms to track incidents of sexual abuse.
These violations are in many ways baked into the body and culture
of CRDF.125 Our current approach to incarceration, requires dras119. Id.
120. Id.
121. Id.
122. See Maya Lau, L.A. County Women’s Jail Lags Behind National Standards on Preventing Sexual Abuse, Report Finds, L.A. Times (Apr. 1, 2018, 5:00
AM),
https://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-lasd-prea-20180401-story.
html [https://perma.cc/TR9D-FBCV] (showing that none of the women’s jails
in Los Angeles county meets current standards for the prevention of prison
rape and sexual abuse).
123. Id.
124. Id.
125. Though the conduct of prison officials is not the focus of this Article,
it is important to note that incidents of abuse lie in the background of any issue
affecting incarcerated people. Abuse of power and authority is prevalent in
carceral institutions due to a lack of public visibility, ineffective methods of
enforcing protections, and an insulated grievance system. Further, incarcerated
women are disproportionately victims of sexual abuse. For more information,
and a starting place for research into these issues, see Dorothy Q. Thomas et
al., All Too Familiar: Sexual Abuse of Women in U.S. State Prisons (1996);
see also Malika Saada Saar et al., The Sexual Abuse to Prison Pipeline: The
Girl’s Story (2015).

66

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

Vol. 26.43

tic, comprehensive, and innovative solutions beyond simply halting
current relocation plans.126
B.

Community Efforts Should Guide the Way Forward

Community efforts from JusticeLA, and their constituent
community member organizations, have recontextualized the discussion of the jail system in Los Angeles. These community actors
envisioned the issues around the relocation as simultaneously
inclusive of the incarcerated women at CRDF, the communities supporting these women, and the communities surrounding the facility
in the City of Lynwood—a more inclusive vision which shifted the
opinion of the Board of Supervisors far enough to reconsider both
the CRDF relocation efforts and their significantly more expensive
plans for the mental health jail.127 Their work defining the issues as
having broad reach and impact create space for more imaginative
and comprehensive solutions than might otherwise be available
under a strict legal claim. As discussed, the prison and jail systems
and legal structures interact to reinforce an inhospitable climate for
inmates’ rights claims.128 In particular, the fight for visitation rights
faces legal precedent which would undermine any legal effort to
ensure access. Yet, in spite of these institutional and legal barriers,
community organizing and dedication resulted in halting the relocation efforts without bringing a single claim to court.
JusticeLA thought outside of the legal and institutional box to
leverage our common sense of humanity and decency. For example,
JusticeLA used many different strategies to publicize the relocation. In October 2017, activists gathered to protest outside of the
Board of Supervisor’s meeting to show their disapproval of the
decision to move forward with the new women’s facility.129 JusticeLA also organized a multimedia demonstration outside of the
Kenneth Hahn Hall of Administration in downtown Los Angeles, setting up one hundred prison bunks in front of the building
to raise awareness for opposition to the new jail plan.130 The coa126. Id.
127. See Macias, supra note 1 (explaining that the Supervisors were concerned that the location of the project would not best serve the women, their
families, or their community).
128. See supra Part I.B.
129. Melissa Etehad, Foes of Jail Construction Plan Protest in Downtown
L.A., L.A. Times (Oct. 31, 2017, 1:00 PM), http://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/
la-me-ln-jail-expansion-protest-20171031-story.html [https://perma.cc/YLB5NVMP].
130. Campaign Against Jail Expansion in L.A. County by Bringing 100 Jail
Beds to County Board of Supervisors Meeting, JusticeLA, http://justicelanow.
org/justicela-kicks-off-campaign-to-end-jail-expansion-in-l-a-county [https://

2019

Relocating the Los Angeles Women’s Jail

67

lition later transformed the beds into protest art pieces and placed
them in public places in each of the cities in Los Angeles County on
Christmas Eve 2017, some of which also included public statements
from the artists themselves.131 JusticeLA also produced informational materials, including a report containing incarceration trends
and statistics.132 The demonstrations and information campaigns
worked to raise awareness of the issue, garnering local news coverage and creating pressure by incessantly targeting the Board of
Supervisors as the decisionmaking body. In addition, JusticeLA
members continued to attend and speak out at the Board of Supervisor meetings.
The efforts of the JusticeLA coalition eventually succeeded in
swaying Los Angeles County Board Supervisors Sheila Kuehl and
Hilda Solis to halt the vote on moving forward with the construction of the new Mira Loma facility—a vote which ultimately led to
the end of the relocation plans.133 This type of long-term strategy
should be applauded, and it may guide the Board of Supervisors
ever onward towards ensuring better conditions for the women
at CRDF. The continued community movement will be necessary going forward, as preventing the relocation to the Mira Loma
facility does not preclude a move to another location. Supervisor
Kathryn Barger has suggested that she would be open to relocating
CRDF to a facility in a more centralized location within the county,
closer to the current location in Lynwood.134
A closer facility would likely solve many of the issues posed by
the Mira Loma facility, but it still leaves many issues unaddressed.
Open questions remain around what type of visitation policies
would be implemented, whether the rehabilitative and educational proposals of the Mira Loma facility would be included at a new
facility, and whether a new facility would be responsive towards the
perma.cc/MC4Z-452E].
131. Michael Livingston, Coalition Merges Art and Activism for Holiday Message About Mass Incarceration, L.A. Times (Dec. 31, 2017), https://
www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-ln-jailbeds-20171228-story.html [https://­
perma.cc/MF2W-TTVP]; see also JusticeLA Call for Artists!, JusticeLA, http://­
justicelanow.org/justicela-call-for-artists [https://perma.cc/7NJW-MYY8].
132. Reclaim, Reimagine, and Reinvent: An Analysis of L.A. County’s
Criminalization Budget, JusticeLA (Dec. 12, 2017), http://justicelanow.org/
wp-content/uploads/2017/12/JLA_Budget_Report_Final.pdf [https://perma.cc/
UN6B-2AHV].
133. Elizabeth Marcellino, Proposed Women’s Jail in Lancaster Losing
Support from LA County Supervisors, L.A. Daily News (Jan. 8, 2019), https://
www.dailynews.com/2019/01/08/la-county-leaders-push-back-on-massivewomens-jail-project [https://perma.cc/4ND2-BZBW].
134. Id.

68

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

Vol. 26.43

PREA noncompliance issues in the jail system. Similarly, selecting
another location would not necessarily invest in the communities in
Lynwood who remain economically vulnerable.

Conclusion
The story of the efforts to stop the relocation of CRDF is
complicated. It involves the disenfranchised population of incarcerated women who were to be relocated, the children and families
of these women, the communities located around CRDF, the institutional actors who served to benefit from relocating CRDF to Mira
Loma, and concerned community members who wanted to prevent
more harm to incarcerated women. It includes issues ranging from
inmate rights and sexual abuse to health concerns regarding the
communication of rare diseases and exposure to multiple types of
hazardous waste. And all of this occurred against a historical and
legal backdrop of generations of exploitation and judicial indifference towards the people our society chooses to keep locked up.
The legal framework supporting the rights of inmates was—
and is—so hostile that remedying the situation for the women
of CRDF through legal action was unlikely to be fruitful. Community action seemed to be the only viable avenue, but the
Board of Supervisors approved the relocation in spite of strong
community opposition. Even with these impediments, the community managed to prevail, showing the need to pursue justice with a
dogged vehemence.
Community efforts gained steam slowly, steadily gathering
support over the course of several years. This buildup began with
individual community organizations asking to have their voices
heard against the weight of a billion-dollar incarceration project,
and the coalition transformed the many voices into a single voice
that could not be ignored. There are many issues that have been
left on the table regarding the relocation efforts, but I think that
we can use the example presented by JusticeLA to map how we
respond to these other issues and any relocation efforts that will
inevitably arise into the future.
Going forward, we need to hold government officials to the
best of their promises of reform while also addressing the issues
facing disenfranchised communities. As seen here, the women
incarcerated within these facilities are mothers, daughters, sisters,
and friends, and they continue to be members of our communities
while they are incarcerated. It is well beyond time that our institutions treat them as such.

