REJECTING THE PURITY MYTH:

Reforming Rape Shield Laws in the Age of Social
Media

Kim Loewen*
I tied my tongue like laces in my baby brother’s shoes
Like a bow around a gift I gave to my father and mother
And my silence equaled every Christmas morning
Where we were still happy and grateful
But my silence was also his next girl’s eyes
Falling like timber
When no one chose to hear
Her roots ripped up
Her ground eroding
To the din of an old man’s zipper
20 years later I wake in damp sheets
My body trembling
To the ghost of her voice cracking like a frozen lake
And I don’t even know her name
Never saw her face
Only heard the rumor that he’d moved on
To the hemorrhage of another perfect thing
— Excerpt from “Trellis” by Andrea Gibson1
I. Introduction
Rape Shield laws, widely enacted across the United States by
the end of the 20th century, dramatically changed the landscape of
criminal sexual assault cases.2 The laws were designed to both encourage survivors3 to report their assaults and to protect survivors
* Juris Doctor Candidate 2015, IIT Chicago-Kent College of Law; B.A. in
Justice and Political Science, American University, 2008; I wish to thank my
parents, Randy and Kathy Loewen, for supporting me on this journey and Justice David Erickson, Senior Instructor, IIT Chicago-Kent College of Law, for
teaching me everything I know about evidence.
1
Andrea Gibson, Trellis, on Yellowbird (2009).
2
Leah DaSilva, The Next Generation of Sexual Conduct: Expanding The
Protective Reach of Rape Shield Laws to Include Evidence Found on Myspace,
13 Suffolk J. Trial & App. Advoc. 211, 211-12 (2008).
3
Throughout this Note, I have done my best to always refer to individuals
© 2015 Kim Loewen. All rights reserved.

151

152

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.151

as much as possible from further shame and invasion at the hands
of any future criminal proceedings.4 Many actors within the criminal justice system, however, especially defense attorneys, complain
that the new rules are unconstitutional because they flip traditional
criminal law protections on their heads.5 Many scholars argue that
for the first time since the incorporation of the Confrontation Clause
to the several states, a broad category of witnesses and testimony
have been placed either partially or totally off-limits to effective
cross-examination.6 These authors claim that, no matter the public
policy reasons behind Rape Shield, such a drastic transformation in
due process protections should be deemed unconstitutional.7
But for those affected by sex crimes, whether survivors or the
friends and family members thereof, Rape Shield laws were simply a small step forward when first enacted—a glimmer of hope
in an otherwise treacherous world where survivors are constantly
and ruthlessly blamed for their own victimization.8 Rape culture is
pervasive and relentless:
What is a Rape Culture? It is a complex of beliefs that
encourages male sexual aggression and supports violence against women. It is a society where violence is
seen as sexy and sexuality as violent. In a rape culture
women perceive a continuum of threatened violence
that ranges from sexual remarks to sexual touching to
rape itself. A rape culture condones physical and emotional terrorism against women as the norm.9
who have been sexually assaulted as “survivors”. The term, from the feminist
perspective, is meant to be empowering and to ensure that those people to
whom it refers are not defined by their victimization, but by their own strength.
As someone with a background as a rape crisis counselor and advocate, I feel
it is important to use this term instead of the more commonly used term, “victim,” even in the context of criminal prosecutions. Furthermore, while I have
attempted to be non-gender specific at certain points in this Note, the majority
of my analysis will use gendered terms, as so much of America’s sexual assault
epidemic is rooted in a gendered culture of rape. See infra p. 2 and n. 9.
4
See DaSilva, supra note 2, at 219-20.
5
Seth I. Koslow, Rape Shield Laws and the Social Media Revolution: Discoverability of Social Media—it’s Social Not Private, 29 Touro L. Rev. 839, 84344 (2013).
6
See, e.g., Shawn J. Wallach, Rape Shield Laws: Protecting The Victim At
The Expense of The Defendant’s Constitutional Rights, 13 N.Y.L. Sch. J. Hum.
Rts. 485 (1997).
7
David Haxton, Rape Shield Statutes: Constitutional Despite Unconstitutional Exclusions of Evidence, 1985 Wis. L. Rev. 1219, 1220 (1985).
8
See DaSilva, supra note 2, at 220.
9
Emilie Buchwald et al., Preamble to Transforming a Rape Culture
(1st ed. 1993).

2015]

Rejecting the Purity Myth

153

While rape culture continues to run rampant in American society,
for a while, criminal trials were at least partially shielded from rape
culture’s vicious control through the enactment of Rape Shield laws.
However, even though Rape Shield laws were a huge step in
the direction of protecting the privacy interests of survivors and
stopping irrelevant information from coming in at trial, the exceptions embedded in Rape Shield laws actually codified much of the
very culture the laws were designed to address. Furthermore, now
that social media use has become nearly ubiquitous (both inside
and outside the courtroom) in the span of a few short years, Rape
Shield laws desperately need to be updated to allow the criminal
justice system to remain a beacon of hope in American culture, and
to remain one of the only places where rape survivors do not have
to perpetually fear slut-shaming10 at every turn.11
Rape Shield laws, as they currently stand, slut-shame all women in the criminal court system when those women have complex
sexual histories:
In California, for example, a police officer who ejaculated on a woman he’d detained in a traffic stop—and
threatened to arrest her if she took action against him—
was let off even after admitting what he’d done. Why?
Well the victim was a stripper on her way home from
work. In officer David Alex Park’s 2007 trial, Park’s
defense attorney argued that the woman “got what she
wanted,” and that she was “an overtly sexual person.”
The jury (composed of one woman and eleven men)
found Park not guilty on all counts.12
This story is unacceptable. Rape Shield laws must be reformed. We
must eradicate from the justice system the myth that a woman has
to be a repressed, Puritanical virgin to be deemed worthy of protection from sexual violence and invasion.13 We must end the purity
myth that controls so much of our society and dictates that the vast
majority of women, because of their complex, messy lives, are “seen
as incapable of being raped.” 14
“Slut-shaming . . . is the idea of shaming and/or attacking a woman or a
girl for being sexual, having one or more sexual partners, acknowledging sexual
feelings, and/or acting on sexual feelings.” Tekanji, FAQ: What is “Slut-Shaming”?, Finally, A Feminism 101 Blog (Apr. 4, 2010), http://finallyfeminism101.
wordpress.com/2010/04/04/what-is-slut-shaming/.
11
See DaSilva, supra note 2, at 228.
12
Jessica Valenti, The Purity Myth: How America’s Obsession with Virginity Is Hurting Young Women 156 (2009).
13
Id. at 157.
14
Id. The “purity myth” will be defined and discussed extensively infra.
10

154

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.151

II. The Fight for Rape Shield
America has a messy history of denying women’s agency
even while purporting to protect women through prohibitions of
sexual assault.15 At common law, evidence of a survivor’s past sexual conduct was always deemed relevant and admissible because
“unchaste behavior was thought to purport dishonesty”.16 The ugly
truth is that this conduct was deemed admissible because women
who engage in “unchaste” behavior were not deemed “worthy” of
society’s protections.17 Women who engage in pre- or extra-marital
sex have been perpetually viewed as at least somewhat culpable
when they are sexually violated.18 Likewise, women who drink,
party, or post provocative pictures of themselves online are often
blamed for their own assaults.19
Rape Shield laws were enacted because of a larger social
problem wherein women were being subjected to horrendous acts
of physical and sexual violence and were not coming forward because they knew that if they did, their whole complex lives would
be put under a repressive, Puritanical microscope and their attacker
would almost certainly go free.20 Rape Shield statutes were enacted
in an attempt to reverse this trend.21
Starting in 1974, states began to adopt variations of Rape
Shield laws to protect survivors who choose to testify against their
assailants.22 The laws came to pass through alliances between feminist and law enforcement groups who wanted to curtail the trend
of requiring survivors to justify their own sexual conduct to prove
themselves “worthy” of justice.23 Across jurisdictions, there are
multiple variants of Rape Shield laws, but they all at least attempted to change one thing: “the previous automatic admissibility of
proof of [the survivor’s] unchastity.”24
The protective laws, as they lived for years and as they stand
today, were not and are not perfect.25 But they do offer some protection from the misogynistic and masochistic tricks utilized for
Id. at 137.
See Wallach, supra note 6, at 487.
17
See Valenti, supra note 15, at 146.
18
Id. at 147.
19
Id.
20
See Wallach, supra note 6, at 488.
21
Id.
22
Id. at 488-89.
23
Id.
24
Harriet R. Galvin, Shielding Rape Victims in the State and Federal Courts:
A Proposal for the Second Decade, 70 Minn. L. Rev. 763, 773 (1986).
25
See Wallach, supra note 6, at 497-98.
15
16

2015]

Rejecting the Purity Myth

155

years by defense attorneys in sexual assault cases. Federal and
state legislators made the decision, in enacting Rape Shield legislation, to prioritize reversing this trend of victimization, shame, and
coerced silence despite the accompanying encroachment into the
traditional rights of the accused in this country.27
On a federal level, Rape Shield is codified in Rule 412 of the
Federal Rules of Evidence.28 The rule establishes that evidence of
the survivor’s sexual conduct or predisposition is not admissible in
either a civil or criminal proceedings unless it falls into one of three
exceptions: (1) specific instances of sexual conduct, when offered
to prove an alternative source of semen or injury; (2) specific instances of sexual conduct between the survivor and the defendant
when offered to prove consent (or offered by the prosecutor); and
(3) a catch-all exception regarding any evidence whose exclusion
would violate the defendant’s constitutional rights.29 Furthermore,
the Federal Rule provides that any evidence of a survivor’s sexual
history may only be admitted if its probative value outweighs any
unfair prejudice to the survivor.30 This is a complete reversal of the
traditional 403 balancing test, which requires that evidence only be
excluded if its prejudicial effect substantially outweighs its probative value.31
26

III. Arguments against Current Rape Shield Laws
To actors inside of the criminal justice system, Rape Shield
laws created a completely altered landscape for both criminal prosecution and defense.32 Even today, decades after their widespread
enactment, attorneys challenge the constitutionality of Rape Shield
laws as applied in their client’s cases and perpetually search for
loopholes through which they can slip.33 And these attorneys have
compelling arguments, both legally and socially. Defendants have
rights enshrined in the Constitution. These constitutional rights
have been, to one degree or another, curtailed in society’s effort
Id.
Id.
28
Fed. R. Evid. 412.
29
Id. Although many defense attorneys have attempted to admit evidence
under this catch-all exception, it is rarely successful, as the entire Rape Statute
codification places public policy goals ahead of the defendant’s constitutional
rights (for better or for worse).
30
Id.
31
Fed. R. Evid. 403.
32
See Wallach, supra note 6, at 497-98.
33
Id. at 499.
26
27

156

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.151

to protect survivors of sexual violence. No one in society desires
to have an innocent person be sent to prison based upon the false
accusations of any one individual. This societal value is especially
pressing if society itself is to blame for not allowing the innocent
accused to fully defend him/herself against the false accusations,
when the supposed evidence of the accused’s innocence is readily
discoverable and traditionally admissible.35
Understandably, defense attorneys were up in arms nearly instantaneously once Rape Shield Laws became widespread.36 The
fact that a certain class of evidence is only admissible after an opposite of the traditional 403 prejudicial versus probative analysis
caused immeasurable upset.37 Furthermore, codified within most
Rape Shield statutes was a new rule allowing, for perhaps the
first time, propensity character evidence to be broadly admissible
against the defendant.38 Many scholars and defense attorneys argued vehemently against these new laws. For example:
[A]s a result of current rape shield rules, the pendulum
of proof required in rape cases has swung in disfavor
of the defendant to the extreme. As Professor Richard
Klein puts it, “in the last thirty-five years, there has been
a steady erosion of the due process rights of those accused of rape.”39
Those who argue against Rape Shield laws often raised the specter of false rape accusations.40 They tell horror stories of people
whose lives are ruined through false reports, and they point to high
profile news stories such as the now infamous Duke lacrosse rape
case.41 Seth Koslow, in an article arguing for the general admissibility of social media evidence over Rape Shield objections, and
as part of his diatribe regarding the horrors of false rape accusations, notes the existence of a website where men falsely accused
post their own personal horror stories.42 Koslow also argues, “In
34

See Haxton, supra note 7, at 1220.
Id. at 1265.
36
Id. at 1220.
37
See Wallach, supra note 6, at 494.
38
David E. Fialkow, The Media’s First Amendment Rights and the Rape
Victim’s Right to Privacy: Where Does One Right End and the Other Begin?,
39 Suffolk U. L. Rev. 745, 759-60 (2006) (“Arguably, the combination of rape
shield laws and the admissibility of the defendant’s past sex crimes put defendants at a significant disadvantage from the outset of their trials.”).
39
See Koslow, supra note 5.
40
Id.
41
Id.
42
Id.
34
35

2015]

Rejecting the Purity Myth

157

effect, Rape Shield rules have given alleged victims carte blanche
to accuse a person of rape, absent any proof, without fear of any
repercussions.”43
This assertion, that Rape Shield laws enable individuals to
falsely accuse people of rape without any repercussions, is simply
patently untrue.44 First, false rape accusations are not that common.45 Second, even in those cases that are found to be based upon
false accusations, the accuser hardly gets off without any repercussions.46 For example, in the now infamous Duke lacrosse case, the
accuser is subjected to the same types of scrutiny as have always
plagued sexual assault cases.47 In the Duke lacrosse case, the complainant was, from the very earliest stages, labelled a “stripper”
and her very ability to be raped was relentlessly questioned in the
media.48 Third, after the complainant’s accusation was found to be
false, she was vilified, to extreme degrees.49
Even when opponents of Rape Shield laws do not base their
arguments on false notions regarding the prevalence and horrors
of false rape accusations, the evidentiary arguments still fail to fully grasp the extent of the public policy reasoning behind retaining
and even strengthening Rape Shield laws.50 For instance, a critic
of current Rape Shield laws argues that parts of the laws should
be overturned because “the sexual conduct evidence excluded exclusively by rape shield statutes is highly probative, [and] the rape
shield statutes’ exclusions are not constitutionally justified by the
governmental interest in ensuring a fair trial.”51 However, the author vastly overestimates the true probative nature of this excluded
evidence. Whether or not a survivor has been involved in previous
sexual conduct, even with the alleged assailant, is not always probative of anything, except maybe in relations to society’s assumptions
and prejudices.52
Id.
The most reputable sources allege a rate of false accusations between
eight and ten percent. Emily Bazelon & Rachael Larimore, How Often Do
Women Falsely Cry Rape? The Question the Hofstra Disaster Left Dangling,
Slate (Oct. 1, 2009, 12:54 PM), http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/jurisprudence/2009/10/how_often_do_women_falsely_cry_rape.html.
45
Id.
46
Id.
47
I. Bennett Capers, Real Women, Real Rape, 60 UCLA L. Rev. 826, 856-57
(2013).
48
Id. at 856, n.158.
49
Id.
50
Id. at 856.
51
See Haxton, supra note 7, at 1261.
52
I will discuss these prejudices and assumptions more fully, and the reason
43
44

158

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.151

Whether or not a survivor has had sex with the defendant
before does not actually have anything to do with whether or not
she consented on the date in question. Arguing otherwise, and the
judicial system continuously allowing defense attorneys to do so,
perpetually and harmfully denies women’s full agency. To allow
defendants to claim that the survivor must be lying about denying consent in this one instance because she did not deny consent
previously rests upon the faulty premise that consent once is the
same as consent always. While the judicial system may not be able
to correct this false assumption from being perpetuated in society,
it does not have to buy into it and allow jurors to base acquittals
off of the logical fallacy. The impetus behind Rape Shield laws was
to clarify for finders of fact in complex and controversial sexual
assault cases which issues they are actually allowed to base their
verdict upon. Legislators and activists must again rise up and stop
allowing jurors to base their verdicts upon the faulty premise that a
woman consenting once or even a thousand times has anything to
do with her consent in a given instance.
Therefore, the author’s argument that this type of evidence
is highly probative is actually just an argument that this evidence
should be included because it feeds into the very stereotypes of
how a victim worthy of societal protections “should” behave. The
Rape Shield laws were enacted to help clarify for the judiciary, and
especially for juries, which issues are truly relevant as to the question of whether or not an assault occurred. In their current incarnation, Rape Shield statues fail to fulfill this objective.
IV. Use of Social Media in Sexual Assault Prosecutions
As social media use has increased, criminal courts across the
country have had to grapple with the admissibility of this new form
of evidence.53 Though it is readily discoverable, many judges have
been reluctant to admit information garnered through social media sites into evidence because it is deemed to be either inherently
untrustworthy or difficult to authenticate.54 While the judicial system as a whole has wrestled with these larger questions of internet evidence admissibility, defense attorneys in sexual assault cases
have increasingly attempted to skirt Rape Shield prohibitions on
why it is erroneous for a fact finder to be allowed to rely on them, later in this
Note.
53
Scott R. Grubman & Robert H. Snyder, Web 2.0 Crashes Through the
Courthouse Door: Legal and Ethical Issues Related to the Discoverability and
Admissibility of Social Networking Evidence, 37 Rutgers Computer & Tech.
L.J. 156, 165 (2011).
54
Id. at 171.

2015]

Rejecting the Purity Myth

159

admitting evidence of the survivor’s past sexual conduct through
the survivor’s social media footprint.55
The hard truth is that we cannot know the vast majority of
the ways and times that a survivor’s social media presence is successfully admitted into trial, because when that evidence is admitted and the defendant is subsequently acquitted, there can be no
appellate record:
Because of the usual prohibition on interlocutory appeals from evidentiary rulings in criminal cases and because the state cannot appeal an acquittal, when a judge
admits a complainant’s sexual history and the defendant is wrongly acquitted, the case is not reviewed by
a higher court. The central problem with admitting a
complainant’s unchaste sexual history is the risk it poses
of leading the decision maker to acquit a defendant unjustly, and yet these cases in which such unjust acquittals
occur are the most difficult to access and critique. Appellate decisions are limited to those in which the government wins, and this limitation hinders the ability to
assess the way rape shield laws work at trial.56
So while we cannot know the extent to which social media evidence
is successfully admitted and utilized by defendants in order to be
acquitted, we can examine those few instances wherein an appellate
court looked at a trial court’s refusal to admit social media evidence.
For example, a defense attorney in Oregon successfully got
a sexual assault prosecution dismissed before a grand jury after
finding the teenager’s MySpace page “where she talked about parties, drinking, and ‘getting some’ and posted provocative pictures
of herself,” which supposedly impeached her statement to police
that “she would never willingly have had sex.”57 This defendant was
able to achieve relief from prosecution because the grand jury did
not believe a girl who had posted provocative photos on-line could
have been raped. In other words, the grand jury bought into the
purity myth and deemed this survivor unworthy of criminal protection and justice.

Id. at 179.
Michelle J. Anderson, From Chastity Requirement to Sexuality License:
Sexual Consent and a New Rape Shield Law, 70 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 51, 95
(2002).
57
Beth C. Boggs & Misty L. Edwards, Does What Happens on Facebook
Stay on Facebook? Discovery, Admissibility, Ethics, and Social Media, 98 Ill.
B.J. 366, 367 (2010).
55
56

160

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.151

In a California sexual assault case, the defendant alleged ineffective assistance of counsel because his attorney did not try to
impeach a rape survivor’s testimony that she was a virgin prior to
her assault by the use of social media evidence that she “engaged
in sexual activity prior to the incident.”58 The California Appellate
Court ruled that excluding this evidence was reversible error because it was relevant to the survivor’s credibility.59 Evidence that
the survivor did not conform to the mold of a woman deemed by
society to be “worthy” of protection was excluded at the trial level,
but was deemed by the appellate court to be crucial to the defendant’s constitutional rights. Therefore, the defendant was granted
a new trial. Additionally, the Supreme Court of Vermont affirmed
a lower court’s ruling that it was reversible error to stop the defendant from admitting allegedly exculpatory posts on the survivor’s
MySpace page.60
Not every state appellate court has ruled in favor of admitting such social media evidence of the survivor’s supposed lack of
chastity. The Supreme Court of Arkansas ruled against a defendant’s ineffective assistance of counsel claim for failing to introduce
evidence of the survivor drinking at a party a few days after the
assault, finding that “the fact that [the survivor] did not, in [the defendant’s] view, look like a victim some days after the event is irrelevant to the question of whether he raped her.”61 So there are some
recent examples of courts disallowing evidence that the survivor
does not conform to the purity myth. Nevertheless, what these examples show is that Rape Shield laws, as they stand, are not enough
to override the improper reliance on the purity myth.
Seth Koslow, in his aforementioned article, relies on the
premise that, because social media sites are inherently public (to
one degree or another), the content of survivor’s pages should not
be shielded from cross-examination in criminal trials.62 However,
Koslow’s premise, either purposefully or negligently, misses the entire reasoning and purpose behind Rape Shield laws. Rape Shield
laws were enacted to protect the victim from attacks that are, by nature, irrelevant to the issue in question (which is whether or not she
was raped).63 Legislators acknowledged that defendants rely upon
societal prejudices to manipulate jurors into disbelieving survivor’s
58
People v. Flynn, F062483, 2013 Cal. App. Unpub. LEXIS 8246, at *5 (Cal.
Ct. App. 5th Dist. Nov. 15, 2013).
59
Id. at *8.
60
State v. Lawrence, 80 A.3d 58, 61 (Vt. 2013).
61
Prater v. State, 402 S.W.3d 68, 76 (Ark. 2012).
62
See Koslow, supra note 5.
63
See Wallach, supra note 6, at 488.

2015]

Rejecting the Purity Myth

161

stories (or even to prevent survivors from coming forward at all).64
In crafting these protective laws, legislators made a choice to clarify
for the judiciary which issues are actually relevant to the credibility of survivors.65 To a certain degree, the notion of the survivor’s
supposed chastity was excluded from those issues deemed actually
relevant.66 Whether or not the chastity evidence is “public” does
not change the relevancy question.
Many of the cases where survivors’ social media profiles were
deemed admissible during their criminal proceedings involved assertions by the survivor that they do not have sex or that in some
other way they conform to the puritanical expectations of society.67
Then, when a clever defense attorney gains access to the survivor’s
social media presence, they find evidence that implies that the survivor has had sex before or in some way does not conform to the
purity myth.68 Courts have sometimes allowed the introduction of
this evidence, deeming it relevant to the survivor’s supposed credibility.69 The problem with this trend, however, is that it harkens
back to the chastity requirements that Rape Shield laws were enacted to protect against. Rape culture perpetually drives home the
notion that a woman only deserves to see justice following her assault if she conforms to the purity myth.70
Every woman, every person for that matter, who has an active
sex life, no matter how casual or committed, deserves just as much
justice following a sexual assault as a person who has never had consensual sex before. Justice should not, and must not depend upon
the subjective social acceptability of the survivor. Rape Shield laws
were designed to, in some ways, curb the social acceptability requirement codified in criminal sexual assault statutes. Not only did
Rape Shield laws not go far enough, but they also actually re-codified part of the very structure that they intended to dismantle.
V. The Purity Myth
Jessica Valenti, feminist author and founder of the groundbreaking feminist blog, Feministing, wrote in her 2010 book, The
Purity Myth: How America’s Obsession with Virginity is Hurting
Young Women, about the myriad ways in which this country’s focus
on a repressed, Puritanical version of feminine worth affects our
64
65
66
67
68
69
70

Id.
Id.
Id.
Id.
Id.
Id.
See Valenti, supra note 15.

162

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.151

modern world. One of the topics Valenti focuses on is the incredibly harmful effect that the purity myth has on survivors of sexual
assault.72 Crucial to her analysis is the premise that women under
the purity myth are deemed perpetually responsible for the sexual
actions of the men in their lives:
Making women the sexual gatekeepers and telling men
they just can’t help themselves not only drives home the
point that women’s sexuality is unnatural, but also sets
up a disturbing dynamic in which women are expected
to be responsible for men’s sexual behavior.73
Under this theory, women are blamed for their own assaults, even
when being taught to practice abstinence.74
As has already been discussed, until Rape Shield laws were
enacted, America’s criminal justice system had nearly entirely embraced the purity myth and continuously allowed evidence of a
survivor’s failures to live up to the unrealistic standard of required
chastity.75 However, even after Rape Shield laws were enacted, the
exceptions built into the laws still codified, to a certain degree, the
“worthiness” requirements of the purity myth by allowing defendants to bring in certain types of evidence regarding the survivor’s
sexual history.76 Valenti warns:
That is where the purity myth gets truly dangerous, because it’s encroaching on our lives not just through social influences, but directly through legislation—legislation that’s mired in fear of young women’s sexuality, in
paternalism, and in a need to punish women who aren’t
‘pure.’77
Allowing this codification of the purity myth reinforces the notion
that women who do not conform to the sexual purity standard
should accept and even expect to face sexual violence. 78
But the purity myth is just that: a myth.79 The number of
women who actually fit into the mold prescribed by the purity myth
is miniscule.80 The number of women who are sexually assaulted
71

Id.
Id.
73
Id. at 108.
74
Id. (“Classes portray abstinence as a choice—which, considering the
high rates of rape and sexual assault among young people, it often just isn’t.”).
75
Id.
76
Id.
77
Id. at 123.
78
Id. at 147.
79
Id.
80
Id. at 108.
71
72

2015]

Rejecting the Purity Myth

163

in America every day of every year, however, is not miniscule.81
It is astronomical.82 So this country’s criminal justice system cannot afford to allow the purity myth to remain codified in their law
books. Women deserve better than this. Survivors deserve to have
the law stop perpetuating lies. The introduction of social media
at sexual assault trials has simply made this issue more complex
and more pressing, but the issue is not new. Since their enactment,
Rape Shield laws have failed to effectively eliminate the common
law chastity requirement in sexual assault cases.83
Some states still base their criminal code addressing sexual
assault on the common law notion that rape is a crime committed
against the woman’s father or husband, not against the woman.84 In
Maryland, the law, as it stands, establishes the reprehensible notion
that, once a woman consents to sex, she cannot change her mind.85
The Maryland court decision upholding this law rested upon the
notion that only a virgin can be raped and went so far as to say “that
any act following the penetration—the ‘initial infringement upon
the responsible male’s interest in a woman’s sexual and reproductive functions’—can’t constitute rape because ‘the damage is done’
and the woman can never be ‘re-flowered.’”86
Current Rape Shield Laws provide an exception allowing evidence of the survivor’s past sexual conduct when that past conduct
is with the accused. Even this long-standing exception rests upon
rudimentary and patently untrue common law notion that, once a
man has gained consent from a woman, that woman is unlikely to or
incapable of denying the man consent in the future.
Having been told their entire lives that only “virgins” are
deemed worthy of societal protection from sexual assault, survivors
often make proclamations that they fit that purity myth model.87
Then what too often happens is the defense attorney takes the survivor’s unequivocal statement of virtue and inevitably finds a crack
in the reality of her life. It is nearly impossible for anyone to fit
into the mold expected of young women in this country.88 And yet
women are told over and over again, through federally and state
funded abstinence-only “education” classes, that it is woman’s job
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88

Id.
Id.
See Anderson, supra note 56, at 94.
Because women were, legally speaking, property. Id. at 61.
Id.
Id.
See Valenti, supra note 15.
Id.

164

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.151

to stop the unwanted sexual advances of men. So a woman who is
assaulted, no matter her age, far too often feels the need to justify
her actions, her clothes, her words, and even her very existence to
try and “prove” that she is not at fault for her own assault.90
89

VI. Conclusion
This is the world that we live in. This is the society that women must already navigate. The initial hope behind Rape Shield laws
was that survivors at their criminal trials would not have to endure
the same crucible of expectations and blame that a society overrun
by rape culture and the purity myth subjects them to every single
day. The introduction of the survivor’s social media profiles at these
trials, under the guise of impeaching the survivor’s credibility, has
made Rape Shield laws appear to be nothing more than a hollow
gesture. These laws were written and enacted before the beginning of the 21st century, before social media platforms became so
widely used.
Whether intentionally or otherwise, current Rape Shield laws
perpetuate the victim-blaming that is so prevalent in society. The
Federal Rules of Evidence explicitly allows for evidence of the survivor’s past sexual conduct when that conduct was with the alleged
assailant. The message that this exception sends to survivors (and
to women in general) is that if she has said “yes” once, “no” might
not always mean “no” after that initial affirmative response. Moreover, it codifies into our criminal justice system the notion that
women who are not virgins, who do not fit the purity myth, are less
capable of being raped:
[O]ne of the expressive messages communicated by
rape shield laws is that sexual history does matter. The
message to jurors is that they should assume the complainant is a virgin, or at least a good girl, and thus deserving of the law’s protection. In other words, rather
than subverting the common law’s chastity requirement,
rape shield laws reify the requirement in another form.91
The law must not be a place where such codification of the purity
myth is passively accepted, or even celebrated as a sufficient improvement over the prior system.
The vast majority of sexual assaults in this country are acquaintance rapes. The rates of intimate partner violence are staggering.
89
90
91

Id.
Id.
See Capers, supra note 47, at 871-72.

2015]

Rejecting the Purity Myth

165

And yet, as codified in our criminal code, it is much more difficult
for a woman to prove she was actually sexually assaulted if she, like
most women in her situation, has consensually slept with or even
simply flirted with her assailant before. This problem becomes even
more pervasive when so much of so many women’s lives are lived
online, so that there is a literal trail of every time she transgresses
from the purity myth.
Just as women should not be expected to stay off of the internet in order to avoid online sexual harassment, so women should
not be expected to stay off of social media before or after being
sexually assaulted. Every time a criminal court allows social media evidence that a survivor of sexual assault has had sex (or even
simply implied or appeared like she has) to be admitted at trial, our
justice system reinforces the notion that non-virgins are not worthy
of societal protection from or justice for sexual assault.
Michelle Anderson proposes a new look at Rape Shield laws
that would eliminate the defense’s ability to slut-shame the survivor or base the defense on the false notion that consent before
equals consent now.92 Like Michelle Anderson, I believe that the
rape shield exceptions allowing evidence of “prior pattern sexual
conduct with third parties, prior sexual history with third parties to
bolster a defendant’s claim of a reasonable but mistaken belief that
the victim consented, prior prostitution with third parties, and prior
sexual conduct with the defendant—are unsupportable and should
be abolished.”93
Furthermore, Rape Shield laws should be updated to exclude
evidence found on the survivor’s social media outlets unless that
evidence, in limited circumstances, directly goes towards the two
remaining exceptions to rape shield: “evidence of an alternative
source of semen, pregnancy, disease or injury, and evidence of bias
or motive to fabricate.”94 By direct evidence, I mean an actual admission, not circumstantial evidence such as photos of the survivor
in provocative (but not explicitly sexual) scenarios with other people at the same time that the alleged assault occurred. This exception allowing the limited use of discoverable social media evidence
should be narrowly tailored to exclude evidence which is solely intended to slut shame the survivor.
Rape is rape. Women are full human beings with agency, and
they unequivocally have the ability to say “yes” or “no” or anything
in between to anyone making sexual advances. Saying “yes” once
92
93
94

See Anderson, supra note 56.
Id. at 96-97.
Id.

166

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.151

or a thousand times does not make her later “no” any less valid or
worthy every time she says it. Rape Shield laws must be reformed
to eradicate the purity myth that is still embedded therein. There
is no one image or type of behavior that a woman must present in
order to be worthy of these societal protections. The harsh truth is
that the women who do not fit the purity model are far more often
the ones who are subjected to sexual violence and therefore need
society’s protection the most.

