THE DEVADASI SYSTEM:
Temple Prostitution in India

Ankur Shingal*
Introduction
Sexual exploitation, especially of children, is an international epidemic.1 While it is difficult, given how underreported such
crimes are, to arrive at accurate statistics regarding the problem, “it
is estimated that approximately one million children (mainly girls)
enter the multi-billion dollar commercial sex trade every year.”2
Although child exploitation continues to persist, and in many instances thrive, the international community has, in recent decades,
become increasingly aware of and reactive to the issue.3 Thanks in
large part to that increased focus, the root causes of sexual exploitation, especially of children, have become better understood.4
While the issue is certainly an international one, spanning
nearly every country on the globe5 and is one that transcends “cultures, geography, and time,” sexual exploitation of minors is perhaps
* J.D., Class of 2014, University of Chicago Law School; B.A. in Political
Science with minor in South Asian Studies, Class of 2011, University of California, Los Angeles. Currently an Associate at Quinn Emanuel Urquhart and Sullivan, LLP. I would like to thank Misoo Moon, J.D. 2014, University of Chicago
Law School, for her editing and support.
1
Press Release, UNICEF, UNICEF calls for eradication of commercial
sexual exploitation of children (Dec. 12, 2001), available at http://www.unicef.
org/newsline/01pr97.htm.
2
Id.
3
See generally Karene Jullien, The Recent International Efforts To End
Commercial Sexual Exploitation Of Children, 31 Denv. J. Int’l L. & Pol’y 579,
580 (2003) (“Commercial sexual exploitation of children is not a recent problem but it has gained more public interest over the last decade.”).
4
For example, according to UNICEF, the underlying causes of sexual exploitation are diverse, including “poverty, gender discrimination, war, organized
crime, globalization, greed, traditions and beliefs, family dysfunction, and the
drug trade[,]” among others. See Press Release, supra note 1.
5
The number of women and children who are sexually exploited for commercial reasons alone are as follows: “100,000 in the Philippines, 400,000 in
India, 100,000 in Taiwan, 200,000 in Thailand, 244,000-325,000 in the United
States, 100,000 in Brazil, 35,000 in West Africa, 175,000 in Eastern [and] Central Europe.” Id.
© 2015 Ankur Shingal. All rights reserved.

107

108

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.107

at its worst in India. India, the world’s second most populous country, suffers from an extremely high rate of sexual exploitation of
minors.7 While there has been a significant amount of research
on child sexual exploitation in India and other countries in South
Asia,8 legal scholarship on specific practices within the subcontinent are significantly more limited. This paper looks to fill that void
by introducing, explaining, and attempting to provide solutions to
the devadasi tradition.
The devadasi 9 practice is one in which low-caste10 girls, as
young as five or six, are “married” to a Hindu Goddess and sexually exploited by temple patrons and higher caste individuals.11
The term devadasi is a Sanskrit word, which literally translates to
“female slave of God.”12 The practice is particularly interesting, as
well as difficult to combat, as it arises out of a crossroads of religion,
poverty, and societal norms. In addressing the devadasi practice,
this paper does the following: (i) discusses the devadasi system’s
historical and cultural underpinnings; (ii) addresses the evolution
of the system to the modern day; (iii) focuses on why the devadasi practice violates both domestic and international law; and (iv)
6

6
P.M. Nair, Trafficking Women and Children for Sexual Exploitation:
Handbook for Law Enforcement Agencies in India, UN Office on Drugs and
Crime 1, Foreword (2007), http://www.unodc.org/documents/ humantrafficking/
India_Training_material/Handbook_for_Law_Enforcement_Agencies_in_India.pdf.
7
For example, End Child Prostitution, Child Pornography And Trafficking of Children for Sexual Purposes (“ECPAT”), an NGO specializing on the
issue, reported that there were over three million children involved in prostitution in India. See Roz Prober & Mark Erik Hecht, Child Advocates Unite
Against A Global Rise in Child Exploitation, Hum. Rts. Trib. 36 (Dec. 1999),
available at http://www.hri.ca/tribune/viewArticle. asp?ID=2531.
8
See, e.g., Vandana Rastogi, Preserving Children’s Rights: The Challenges
of Eradicating Child Sexual Exploitation In Thailand And India, 22 Suffolk
Transnat’l L. Rev. 259, 261 (1998).
9
It is important to note that the devadasi practice is known by different
names in different places. For example, devadasis are known as Muralis in Maharashtra, Basavis and Muralis in Andhra Pradesh, and Jogatis and Basavis in
Karnataka. For the purposes of this paper, I refer to this collective group as
devadasis.
10
The girls are usually of Dalits, a term used to refer to the lowest of the
four castes in India. As is discussed in more detail in the following sections
of this paper, Dalits are usually confined to certain jobs in Indian society and
often face intense discrimination. As such, many women in that caste are either forced, as in the case of the devadasis, or choose to become part of the
sex trade. See Who are Dalits?, Navsarjan.org, http://navsarjan.org/ navsarjan/
dalits/whoaredalits (last visited Sept. 29, 2014).
11
See Hyun Jin Lee, Temple Prostitutes: Devadasi Practice And Human
Trafficking In India, 8 Regent J. Int’l L. 1, 2 (2011).
12
Id.

2015]

The Devadasi System

109

explains what judges can do, given India’s current focus on sexual
crimes and exploitation in the wake of the 2012 Delhi tragedies, to
truly combat the devadasi practice.
I. The Historical Devadasi System
The historical account of the devadasi system is murky due
to its early inception.13 The first confirmed reference to a devadasi
was during the Keshari Dynasty in the 6th century A.D. in South
India.14 The practice began when one of the great queens of the Dynasty decided that in order to honor the gods, certain women who
were trained in classical dancing, should be married to the deities.15
The inception of the practice was one that was imbued with great
respect as the women whom were chosen to become devadasi were
subject to two great honors: first, because they were literally married to the deity, they were to be treated as if they were the Goddess
Lakshmi16 herself, and second, the women were honored because
they were considered to be “those great women who [could] control natural human impulses, their five senses and [could] submit
themselves completely to God.”17 As they were married to an immortal, the women were considered to be auspicious. Their main
duties, in addition to committing to a life without marriage, were
to take care of a temple and learn classical Indian dances, usually
13
Nat’l Human Rights Comm’n of India and United Nations Dev. Fund
For Women, A Report on Trafficking in Women and Children in India 20022003 7 (2004), http://nhrc.nic.in/Documents/ ReportonTrafficking.pdf. “There is
no substantial evidence of the origin of culturally sanctioned practices in India,
though it has been suggested by historians that the devadasi system was known
in prehistoric cities in India. . . .” Id. at 195 (emphasis added).
14
Aparimita Pramanik Sahoo, A Brief History of Devadasi System, OrissaDiary (July 18, 2006), http://www.orissadiary.com/Showyournews.asp?id=26. At
the same time, other experts argue that the institution is “far older, and claim
that what is arguably one of the most ancient extant pieces of Indian art, a small
bronze of a naked dancing girl from Mohenjo-daro, dating to around 2500 B.C.,
could depict a devadasi.” See William Dalrymple, Serving The Goddess: The Dangerous Life of a Sacred Sex Worker, The New Yorker (Aug. 4, 2008), http://www.
newyorker.com/reporting/2008/08/04/080804fa_fact_dalrymple?currentPage=all.
15
See Sahoo, supra note 14.
16
Goddess Lakshmi is held in the highest regard among Hindus, not only
because she is the goddess of wealth and prosperity, but also because she is divinely married to Lord Vishnu. Lord Vishnu is one of the great triumvirates and
is the main god in charge of maintaining and preserving all life on earth and in
the universe as a whole. See Hindu Gods & Goddesses, Sanatan Society, http://
www.sanatansociety.org/hindu_gods_and_goddesses.htm#.VKrPnsZ5jPC (last
visited Jan. 5, 2015); Lakshmi, Sanatan Society, http://www.sanatansociety.org/
hindu_gods_ and_goddesses/lakshmi.htm#.VKrRFsZ5jPA (last visited Jan. 5,
2015).
17
See Sahoo, supra note 14 (internal quotations omitted).

110

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.107

the bharatnatyam, which they would perform at temple rituals.18
Patrons were considered to have higher status for their ability to
financially sponsor devadasis.19
The esteemed status of the devadasis began to wane under Islamic and British rule. Following their successful invasion of North
India,20 Islamic rulers began to destroy Hindu temples throughout
the region.21 Once the Hindu temples in the northern part of the
subcontinent were destroyed, the devadasis, who were effectively
tied to the temples, were left to fend for themselves. With the destruction of the temples, devadasis lost not only their patronage,
but also their status in society, leading to the beginnings of their
exploitation.22 The result of the loss of patronage forced the devadasis, who previously danced at religious temple events, to dance
at “wedding feasts or other private entertainments. Dancing and
prostitution [became] inseparable in India [at this time].”23 The system was further limited under British rule, which unlike the Islamic
Empire reached the entirety of the subcontinent.24 Although academics dispute what the British thought about the custom specifically, many argue that the British reformists sought to distinguish
the practice from religious and traditional customs.25 Regardless of
their view on the practice, the British hierarchy displaced patrons
and rulers who were supportive of the traditional devadasi system,

See Lee, supra note 11.
Id. at 7.
20
The Islamic Empire did not reach much of south India. As such, the
practice continued to flourish in that part of the country. Even today, most
devadasi communities exist in south India. See Pran Nevile, The Courtesan
Was Also a Scholar, TRIB. (India) (Dec. 12, 1999), http://www.tribuneindia.
com/1999/99dec12/sunday/head3.htm.
21
See Lee, supra note 11, at 3.
22
Id. at 3-4. Another argument is that following the death of Aurangzeb,
one of the most infamous Islamic rulers, the “anarchical period” that followed
“became notorious because the standard of morality among the princes and
public men sank to the lowest level[,]” which led to an increase in prostitution
among the devadasis. See Nat’l Human Rights Comm’n of India and United
Nations Dev. Fund For Women, supra note 13, at 197.
23
See Nat’l Human Rights Comm’n of India and United Nations Dev.
Fund For Women, supra note 13, at 196.
24
See, e.g., Sahoo, supra note 14 (“During the British rule, the number of
Devadasis dwindled further. The Orissa Gazette of 1956 lists 9 Devadasis and
11 temple musicians. By 1980, only 4 Devadasis were left. . . .”).
25
Pamyla A. Stiehl, Bharata Natyam: A Dialogical Interrogation of Feminist Voices in Search of the Divine Dance, The J. of Religion and Theatre 275,
280 (2004).
18
19

2015]

The Devadasi System

111

leading to the continued marginalization, and thus exploitation, of
the devadasi group.26
II. The Devadasi Practice in the Modern Day
The modern iteration of the devadasi system, while not nearly
as pervasive both in terms of influence and sheer numbers as in the
past, is one that continues to promote the sexual exploitation of
lower caste girls in India. The system is also, especially in its current form, inextricably linked to poverty and tradition. This section
addresses three issues: first, how many devadasis there are in India
today; second, what the practice currently looks like; and third, why
girls are still being inducted into the devadasi system.
A.

How many Devadasis are there in India today?
Given the disintegration of the devadasi system during Islamic and British rule, both the absolute number and geographic distribution of devadasis has become limited. Nevertheless, according to
the Indian National Commission for Women (“NCW”), there are
still at least 44,000 active devadasi in India, with the NCW noting
that the number could in fact be as high as 250,000.27 Although the
numbers are difficult to confirm due to the practice being not only
underground but also difficult to differentiate from non-religious
prostitution, the practice is particularly concentrated in a few states.
According to the NCW, the majority of active devadasis are in Karnataka (22,491 individuals), Andhra Pradesh (16,624 individuals),
and Maharashtra (2,479 individuals).28
While the geographic concentration of the institution may appear to indicate that the tradition is failing elsewhere, the problem
continues to be a national one, as many girls are trafficked from
different parts of the country to become devadasis. In 2010, the
International Labor Organization’s29 Committee of Experts during
26
Nash Colundalur, Devadasis Are A Cursed Community, The Guardian (Jan. 20, 2011), http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/jan/21/
devadasi-india-sex-work-religion.
27
‘Project Combat’ Launched to Eradicate ‘Devadasi’ System, The Hindu
(Jan. 30, 2006), http://www.hindu.com/2006/01/30/stories/2006013020130300.
htm. The larger figure is supported by other sources also. Dalrymple, supra
note 14 (“There are estimated to be around a quarter of a million devadasis in
Maharashtra and Karnataka, about half of them living around Belgaum.”).
28
Project Combat’ Launched to Eradicate ‘Devadasi’ System, supra note 27.
29
The International Labour Organization (“ILO”) is a notable player in
the labor-related human rights realm. The ILO is one of the chief organizations
that works on behalf of laborers, including migrant workers, on the international stage. It has adopted nearly 190 international conventions, which upon
adoption, are held to be international labor standards. The ILO also boasts one

112

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.107

an extensive study on labor rights in India, noted that the “devadasi
system was linked to the practice of trafficking girls for commercial exploitation. . . .”30 Other media outlets have also found that
many devadasis, along with other prostitutes, “are trafficked to the
red light districts of Mumbai, Pune, Bangalore and other large cities.”31 As such, despite not being at its numerical historical peak,
the devadasi practice continues to persist in India, even thriving in
select states.
B.

What does the practice look like today?
The modern iteration of the devadasi practice is significantly
different from the historic institution, in terms of both its physical
manifestation and underlying goals. Although the practice today
is still about honoring a deity, in most cases Yellamma,32 the similarities between the historic and modern institution effectively
end there. In its current form, the practice is not as much about
temple worship or temple dancing; rather, it is almost singularly related to the sex trade, prostitution, and exploitation of the lower
caste. The difference between the devadasis of the past and those
of today, is perhaps best summarized by William Dalrymple of The
New Yorker:
There is . . . an almost unimaginable gulf separating the
devadasis of ancient poems and inscriptions and the
lives lived by women [today]. In the Middle Ages, the
devadasis were drawn from the grandest families in the
realm—among them princesses of the Chola royal family—and possibly from slaves captured in war. Many
of the widest memberships of any international organization, including nations
from every region of the world. See Regions, Int’l Labour Org., http://www.ilo.
org/global/regions/lang--en/index.htm (last visited November 2, 2014).
30
U.N., General Assembly, Compilation Prepared by The Office of The
High Commissioner for Human Rights in Accordance With Paragraph 5 of The
Annex to Human Rights Council Resolution 16/21, A/HRC/WG.6/13/IND/2
(Apr. 11, 2012).
31
Kate Taylor, Temple Prostitution Still Alive in India, Asia Stories (Jan.
11, 2012) http://www.commissionstories.com/asia/stories/view/temple-prostitution-still-alive-in-india (explaining that the institution is able to persist outside of temples given the underground nature of the practice) (“Because the
devadasis practice has gone underground, the women work mostly from their
homes, only visiting the temple to beg money from worshippers.”).
32
See generally Arun Jaganathan V.R., Yellamma Cult and Divine Prostitution: Its Historical and Cultural Background, 3 Int’l J. of Sci. and Res. Publications 1, 2-3 (2013) (Yellamma is considered to be the “Mother of the Universe”
by many South Indians and is the patron goddess of Andra Pradesh, Karnataka,
and Maharashtra. It is notable that these same states have the highest population of devadasis.).

2015]

The Devadasi System

113

were literate, and some were highly accomplished poets;
indeed, at the time they seem to have been among the
few literate women in the region. Today, the devadasis
are drawn exclusively from the lowest castes—usually
from the Dalit Madar caste—and are almost entirely illiterate. The majority of modern devadasis in Karnataka are straightforward sex workers. . . .33
Despite the practice’s honorable past, the devadasi system has devolved into institutionalized sexual exploitation of the poorest segments of Indian society.
At the same time, it is important to note that the practice is
not exactly the same as a conventional system of sex workers. The
notable difference is the fact that many devadasis are forced into
the lifestyle at an extremely young age due to a combination of
religion and social beliefs. The devadasi tradition is singular due to
the strength of the relationship between religious beliefs and sexual
exploitation.34 Indeed, every year there are still thousands of girls
between the ages of five and ten who are dedicated to the Goddess
Yellamma.35 Chandra, a devadasi who was interviewed by the Wall
Street Journal, noted that “[f]or the first pattam [the tying of the
beads before the goddess], the girl is usually between six and thirteen. But the second pattam [the night of the girl virgin] takes place
after a girl’s f﻿irst menses. . . .”36 The religious and societal undertones of the devadasi practice, despite its real-life manifestations,
set the system apart from other such institutions, both in terms of
the support the tradition receives from the community and the
blind-eye it receives from law enforcement.
C.

Why does the system persist?
The devadasi system, despite not being as widespread as it
once was, continues to thrive in many parts of Western and Southern India. A combination of religious pressure, economic necessity,
and social construction form the basis of the devadasi institution
and perpetuates its survival.
Dalrymple, supra note 14.
In writing this piece, I had the privilege of speaking with The Honorable
Virginia M. Kendall of the Northern District of Illinois on this issue. Given
her expertise on issues of child and sexual exploitation, I asked her if she could
think of another example of a sexual exploitation tradition that was so closely
tied with religion, and she could not.
35
Dalrymple, supra note 14.
36
Catherine Rubin Kermorgant, Becoming a Devadasi, Wall St. J. (Feb.
24, 2014), http://blogs.wsj.com/indiarealtime/2014/02/24/becoming-a-devadasi/
(internal quotations omitted).
33
34

114

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.107

1.

Religious endorsement of the institution
There are at least three religious reasons that the institution
continues to thrive. First, many who perpetuate the devadasi system believe that the younger a girl is dedicated, the more the Goddess will bless her and her family.37 Given that devadasis are usually
only taken from the lowest caste, many of the women who are dedicated to the Goddess believe that the only way that they can lead
a blessed life is to marry the deity directly. Second, many girls who
willingly enter, or are forced to enter, the devadasi system view it as
their only way to rise in India’s rigid caste system. The caste system
dictates not only the relationship between any two people, but also
limits the ability of one person to move above one’s birth caste.38
Many devadasis and their families view marrying the deity as a way
to rise in the otherwise strict caste system. This view is not entirely without support as many in and around the practice have noted that the devadasis are respected, “regarded as auspicious,” and
even called “to upper-caste weddings to give [their] blessing”—all
events that would normally be impossible for a lower-caste individual.39 Third, and perhaps most worrying, is that many Hindu priests
seem to actively condone the practice. According to India’s Human
Rights Commission, there is a prevalent belief that “offering something to the deity [is] rewarded bountifully.”40 The report states that
when individuals went to the temples with problems “such as bad
health, poverty, barrenness, etc., the priests often interpreted these
[problems] as the wrath of the deity and suggested that they should
offer one of their daughters to the service of the deity.”41 Given that
the physical manifestation of Hinduism, i.e., the priests themselves,
perpetuate the system, it is unsurprising that the system continues
to thrive.
2.

Economic necessity
As lower-caste individuals, most potential devadasis have the
choice of either entering the practice or taking part in a distinct number of menial occupations or “unclean work—work that involves
physical contact with blood, excrement, and other ‘defilements as
37
See Lee, supra note 11, at 8 (“The tie between the caste system and forced
prostitution has been proven by the exceedingly high percentage of prostitutes
from the lower castes. The devadasi practice merely bestows a religious sanction or justification to this tie.”).
38
Tom O’Neill, Untouchable, NationalGeographic.com (2003), http://
ngm.nationalgeographic.com/ngm/0306/ feature1/.
39
See Dalrymple, supra note 14.
40
See Nat’l Human Rights Comm’n of India and United Nations Dev.
Fund For Women, supra note 13, at 195.
41
Id.

2015]

The Devadasi System

115

defined by Hindu law.’” Given the fact that most of these jobs
do not pay enough to sustain an individual, much less an extended
family,43 many families pressure their young daughters to become
devadasi. Indeed, the economic incentive is a strong one. As one
devadasi noted, even though her job is insecure and dangerous, she
has been able to “earn two hundred to three hundred rupees from
a single client[,]” which has allowed her to look after and marry off
her sister, provide for her mother and son, and own land, the latter
of which is a rarity for lower-caste individuals.44 Although these
benefits may appear to be good for the women involved, the sobering fact is that once a member of the devadasi is no longer able
to earn money, her family usually either refuses to, or is unable to
provide for her as she once provided for them.45
42

3.

Societal pressure
There are a number of social beliefs within Indian society that
perpetuate the devadasi practice. For example, many landowners,
who almost always are from a higher caste, believe that it is prestigious to deflower as many young girls as possible.46 Compounding
this problem is the fact that many within Indian society believe that
intercourse with a young girl is a panacea for disease.47 The effect of
custom cannot be overstated: according to a survey that was carried
out by the Joint Women’s Programme, Bangalore, over 63.6 percent
of “young girls were forced into the Devadasi system due to custom,
while 38 per cent reported that their families had a history of Devadasi’s.”48 Another social ill that leads to the continued existence of
the system is that much of the society that surrounds the devadasi
See O’Neill, supra note 38 (“Such work includes the cremation of the
dead, cleaning latrines, cutting umbilical cords, removing dead animals from the
roads, tanning hides, and sweeping gutters.”).
43
It is common in India, especially for poorer families, to live with extended families in order to aggregate earnings.
44
See Dalrymple, supra note 14.
45
Id.
46
See Kermorgant, supra note 36.
47
Id. This point is particularly interesting for two reasons. First, many
women within the practice also believe that by having sex with a client, they
pass their HIV/AIDS to that client thus curing themselves. Id. Second, this
idea of virginal sex acting as a panacea for venereal disease is one that exists in
other parts of the globe, in particular in Africa. Mike Earl-Taylor, HIV/AIDS,
The States, The Virgin Cure and Infant Rape, Science in Africa (Apr. 2002),
http://scienceinafrica.com/old/index.php?q=2002/april/virgin.htm.
48
James Varghese, Devadasi’s: Young Indian Temple Prostitutes, ASSIST News Service (Sept. 15, 2010), http://www.assistnews.net/ansarticle.asp?URL=Stories/2010/s10090083.htm.
42

116

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.107

practice is woefully ignorant of the law banning the practice.49 The
following section addresses what those laws, both domestic and international, are and how they are applied to the practice.
III. The Devadasi system and its interaction with Domestic and
International Law
The devadasi system is in violation of both Indian and international law. This section first discusses India’s efforts to outlaw
the practice followed by an analysis of India’s obligations under
international law.
A.

Indian Domestic Law and the Devadasi System
The Indian Government effectively outlawed the devadasi
practice in 1924 when it made dedication of girls for the purpose of
prostitution illegal.50 Since then various states in India, particularly
those in the South, have passed various prohibitions targeted specifically at the devadasi system. The first of the targeted regulations
was the Bombay Devadasi Protection Act (“Bombay Act”), which
was passed in 1934.51 The Bombay Act declared that the practice
was illegal, irrespective of whether the girl was dedicated with or
without her consent.52 Similar regional prohibitions were enacted in other parts of South India throughout the twentieth century,
including the Madras Devadasi (Prevention of Dedication) Act of
1947, the Karnataka Devadasis (Prohibition of Dedication) Act of
1982, the Andra Pradesh Devadasi (Prohibition of Dedication) Act
of 1988, and, most recently, the Maharashtra Devadasi (Abolition
of Dedication) Bill of 2005.53 Based on these Acts, the devadasi
practice is effectively outlawed throughout the entire country, with
laws specifically targeted at parts of the country where the devadasi
practice continues to thrive.
49
See Lee, supra note 11, at 23 (“Inadequate incentives coupled with ignorance of the Acts prohibiting the devadasi practice have resulted in passivity in
governmental action at the law enforcement level.”).
50
Sections 372 and 373 of the Indian Penal Code were amended to declare
“the practice of dedicating girls for the ultimate purpose of engaging them in
prostitution as illegal.” Anil Chawla, Devadasis—Sinners or Sinned Against:
An Attempt to Look at The Myth And Reality of History And Present Status of
Devadasis, Samarthbharat 1, 25 (2002), http://www.samarthbharat.com/files/
devadasihistory.pdf.
51
Text of the act is available at http://maharashtracivilservice.org/cms/
downloads/515a978a94745.pdf.
52
See Chawla, supra note 50.
53
Id. at 25-26. See also Lee, supra note 11, at 10-11 (providing a summary
of the Maharashtra Devadasi Act).

2015]

The Devadasi System

117

Despite these numerous prohibitions, the application of Indian domestic law has been lacking due to both underreporting
and the underground nature of the practice. In 1990, the Indian
Supreme Court in Vishal Jeet vs. Union of India And Ors, noted
that “[i]nspite of the [] stringent and rehabilitative provisions of law
under various Acts, it cannot be said that the desired results had
been achieved” 54 and called for evaluation of the existing measures
by both the central and state governments.55 Since that case, there
have been a number of court cases and petitions in which both the
Indian Supreme Court and other courts, notably the High Court
of Mumbai, handed down rulings and decrees against the devadasi practice. Most recently, on February 13, 2014, in what is being
hailed as an important victory for advocates of women’s rights, the
Supreme Court directed the Karnataka Chief Secretary to “take
all steps to prevent women from being forced to become ‘devadasis’ at a temple function” at the Uttarang Mala Durga temple in
Karnataka.56
B.

International Law Prohibitions
The devadasi practice violates not only domestic laws, but also
a wide range of international conventions and laws. In particular,
the practice stands in stark violation of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights (“UDHR”),57 the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights,58 International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,59 Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination Against Women,60 Convention on the
54
Vishal Jeet vs. Union of India And Ors, 1990 AIR 1412, available at http://
indiankanoon.org/doc/653695.
55
Nat’l Human Rights Comm’n of India and United Nations Dev. Fund
For Women, supra note 13, at 283.
56
Supreme Court Asks Karnataka Chief Secretary to Take Steps to Stop
‘Devadasi’ System, The Times of India (Feb. 13, 2014), http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Supreme-Court-asks-Karnataka-Chief-Secretary-to-takesteps-to-stop-devadasi-system/articleshow/30334077.cms.
57
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, G.A. Res. 217A (III), U.N. Doc.
A/810 at 71 (1948).
58
U.N. Treaty Collection, List of State Parties to the ICCPR, http:// treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=IV-4&chapter=4&lang=en (last visited Oct. 3, 2008).
59
U.N. Treaty Collection, List of State Parties to the ICESCR, http:// treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=IV-3&chapter=4&lang=en (last visited Oct. 3, 2008).
60
U.N. Treaty Collection, List of State Parties to the CEDAW, http:// treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=IV-8&chapter=4&lang=en (last visited Oct. 3, 2008).

118

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.107

Rights of the Child, and Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution
and Child Pornography.62 Notably, India is a state party to each
of these conventions and protocols, indicating that the country as
a whole is working towards putting an end to the practice. Chief
among these protections are prohibitions against forced marriage
and the trafficking of individuals, particularly children and women,
as well as the obligation to assure children a decent life.63
Despite the existence of numerous international prohibitions,
there are at least three issues with the application of international
law to the devadasi practice. First, many of the aforementioned treaties and conventions do not have enforcement mechanisms for the
hearing of individual complaints. For example, the UDHR, which
was not originally meant to be per se binding, lacks any enforcement mechanism, which limits its practical applicability. As such,
despite India’s many international commitments, it is unlikely that
the international community, or even individuals within India, will
be able to hold the country accountable in an international forum.
Second, given that the practice is entirely domestic, the international community must rely on Indian domestic courts to apply international law to the devadasi institution. Unfortunately, India suffers
from a serious lack of enforcement of such laws.64 Third, similar to
the failure of domestic law, the underground nature of the devadasi
system makes application of international law extremely difficult.
61

61
U.N. Treaty Collection, List of State Parties to the CRC, http:// treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=IV-11&chapter=4&lang=en (last visited Oct. 3, 2008).
62
U.N. Treaty Collection, List of State Parties to the CRC-OPII, http://treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=IV-11-c&chapter=4&lang=en (last visited Oct. 3, 2008).
63
This paper does not go into detail about the different subsections of each
convention and how they can be applied to the devadasi practice. For a good
summary of such application, see Lee, supra note 11, at 14-19; see also Bina B.
Hanchinamani, Human Rights Abuses of Dalits in India, 8 Hum. Rts. Brief 15,
19, 29 (2001). Rather, this paper focuses on why international law’s prohibitions have failed.
64
See S.N. Al Habsy & Kishor Uprety, Cooperation For Nominal Development Or Politics For Actual Survival? South Asia In The Making Of International Law, 12 J. Transnat’l L. & Pol’y 19, 65 n. 342 (2002) (stating that in
terms of human trafficking laws, “[e]nforcement of laws is crucial. Indeed, in
countries like India, Nepal, and Pakistan, there are impressive sounding laws . . .
on the books, but they are rarely enforced.”).

2015]

The Devadasi System

119

IV. Brighter Future? What the Law, and Judges, Can Do to
Combat the Practice
The devadasi practice continues to exist despite both domestic and international law prohibiting it. As discussed, the chief reasons for its persistence are economic, religious, and societal, each of
which force women to partake in the practice while also curtailing
any meaningful action being taken against the tradition as a whole.
While the reasons behind the perpetuation of the devadasi practice
seems to have deep roots in the Indian consciousness, recent events
in India indicate that the populace is beginning to push for meaningful change. This section first discusses the reason for that change
in the Indian mindset. It then argues that judges can capitalize on
this changing mindset and put the final nail in the devadasi practice’s coffin.
A.

India’s Sexual Violence Revolution65
India is in a moment of flux following the horrific 2012 Delhi
rape incident.66 The brutality and brazenness of the crime drummed
up substantial domestic and international press67 along with nationwide protests.68 The increased focus on sexual violence against
young women, largely due to that event, has continued, shedding
light on a number of violent rapes and sexual assaults since the
2012 incident. For example, in reaction to a particularly heinous69
2014 rape and murder of a 16-year-old girl in Calcutta, thousands of
65
There have been many calls for a sexual revolution in India. See, e.g.,
Shikha Dalmia, India Needs A Sexual Revolution: How to Stop The Endless ‘Eve
Teasing’? Change The Puritanical Culture, Wall St. J. (May 24, 2013), http://www.
wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424127887324787004578497420867545326.
66
The 2012 incident involved a gang rape of a 23-year-old physiotherapy
student on a public bus. She died of her injuries thirteen days later. Six men
were arrested for the crime. One of these men committed suicide while in prison, and a second, a juvenile, was sentenced to three years of rehabilitation. See
Delhi Gang Rape: Death Penalty for Two Men Put on Hold, BBC News India
(Mar. 15, 2014), http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-26593587.
67
See, e.g., Mallica Joshi, Delhi Gang-Rape: Last Year’s Protestors React
to Verdict, Hindustan Times (Sept. 13, 2013), http://www.hindustantimes.com/
india-news/newdelhi/delhi-gang-rape-last-year-s-protestors-react-to-verdict/
article1-1121797.aspx; Press Release, Embassy of the U.S., U.S. Embassy New
Delhi, India, Statement on the Death of New Delhi Assault Victim (Dec. 29,
2012), available at http://newdelhi.usembassy.gov/pr122912.html.
68
Soutik Biswas, Protests in India after Delhi gang-rape victim dies, BBC News
India (Dec. 29, 2012), http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-20863707.
69
The girl was gang raped, filed a police report the next day, and then was
raped again by the same men. The assailants then set her on fire when she refused to withdraw the police complaint. See Protests in India After Police Try
to Forcibly Cremate Body of Twice Raped, Burnt 16yo Girl, RT (Jan. 2, 2014),
http://rt.com/news/india-rape-protests-killed-084/.

120

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.107

protesters took the streets to demand more meaningful action from
the government and police.70
The frequent, unrelenting protests and media scrutiny have
forced many within the Indian government to question both the vitality of the laws and their woeful application.71 Within one month
of the 2012 incident, on January 23, 2013, a committee headed by
Justice J.S. Verma, former Chief Justice of the Indian Supreme
Court, “was constituted to recommend amendments to the Criminal Law so as to provide for quicker trial and enhanced punishment
for criminals accused of committing sexual assault against women.”72 The report culminated in wide-reaching policy reform that
not only required the death penalty for a number of sexual crimes,
but also criminalized “eve-teasing,” which has been described as
“the coy and euphemistic name for the sexual harassment—the
stalking, groping and lewd comments—that every Indian women
is forced to navigate every time she walks out of her home.”73 This
drastic change in policy and law reflects a change in the national
mood and understanding of sexual rights of women and young girls.
It is this change that judges must capitalize on.
B.

How Judges Can Combat the Devadasi System
Given that Indian society is in the midst of recalibrating its
morality and is moving towards stronger laws to protect young girls
from their previously dangerous reality, there may be no better time
for judges to put pressure on the devadasi system.74 This section
discusses two steps that judges should take to combat the practice.
70
There have been a number of high profile sexual violence cases in the
last couple of years. Many of these later incidents have been met with public
protest.
71
Delhi Bus Gang Rape: Uproar in Indian Parliament, BBC News India
(Dec. 18, 2012), http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-20765869.
72
Report Summaries, Justice Verma Committee Report Summary, PRS
Legis. Research (2014), http://www.prsindia.org/parliamenttrack/report-summaries/justice-verma-committee-report-summary-2628/. See Justice Verma
Comm. on Amendments, Report Of The Committee On Amendments To Criminal Law (Jan. 23, 2013), http://www.prsindia.org/uploads/media/Justice%20
verma%20committee/js%20verma%20committe%20report.pdf.
73
Lavanya Sankaran, Can India’s New Laws Stop Rape?, The Guardian (Apr. 3, 2013), http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/apr/03/
indias-new-laws-stop-rape.
74
This is not to say that judges have ultimate power in ending the practice.
Indeed, parents, police, and politicians may in fact have more power to effect
change. For example, many have argued that the most effective way to combat
the practice is to increase “the awareness of the devadasis” in local villages. See
Maria Costanza Torri, Abuse of Lower Castes in South India: The Institution of
Devadasi, 11 J. Int’l Women’s Stud. 31, 44 (2009). However, this paper focuses
on the judiciary as a vehicle through which the already enacted laws can be

2015]

The Devadasi System

121

1.

Apply the laws vigorously
Perhaps judges most obvious power is to ensure that the law,
as laid down by the legislator, is interpreted and applied in an effective manner. In the case of sexual exploitation in India, and particularly in regards to the devadasi practice, judges would do well
to vigorously apply the newly created laws, which as noted above,
create expedited causes of actions against those who commit or facilitate sexual exploitation. The Indian Supreme Court seems to
be taking the lead on the issue by taking an active role in the prosecution of those involved in the practice. For example, the Court
recently required that various officials in India, in particular the
Karnataka Chief Secretary, take meaningful steps to protect young
girls who are going to be dedicated to the devadasi practice.75 The
court, in telling the Chief Secretary to enforce the law against the
practice, sets a proactive standard in which the judiciary requires officials to take “all preventative measures” to ensure that the system
is not perpetuated.76
While this suggestion—one in which judges, and particularly
lower court judges, are being told to do their job in a meaningful
way—might seem plainly obvious, the fact that India’s judicial system is notoriously corrupt illustrates that such a recommendation
might not be as easy to apply as it first seems. For example, while
under-reporting might be the biggest problem with enforcement of
the laws, even in cases where the crime is reported, police officers
do little or nothing to enforce the laws.77 The problem is not limited to the police, but extends to a judiciary that is not only susceptible to bribes, but is also so slow and inefficient that the goal of
deterrence is usually never met.78 If Indian judges, following the
effectively applied to remedy the practice.
75
See Supreme Court Asks Karnataka Chief Secretary to Take Steps to Stop
‘Devadasi’ System, supra note 56.
76
Check Devadasi Practice, Supreme Court Tells Govt, The Times of India
(Feb. 14, 2014), http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/bangalore/Check-devadasi-practice-Supreme-Court-tells-govt/articleshow/30364726.cms.
77
Agence France Presse, India Teen Commits Suicide After Police Pressure
Her To Drop Gang Rape Case, Marry Attacker, Huff Post (Dec. 27, 2012), http://
www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/12/27/india-gang-rape-suicide_n_2370859.html
(“A 17-year-old Indian girl who was gang-raped committed suicide after police
pressured her to drop the case and marry one of her attackers, police and a
relative said on Thursday.”).
78
See Swarna Rajagopalan, One Year After Delhi Rape Case, The Courage
to Change Is in Our Hands, DNA (Dec. 16, 2013), http://www.dnaindia.com/
analysis/standpoint-one-year-after-delhi-rape-case-the-courage-to-change-isin-our-hands-1935841 (“Moreover, if the judiciary would process cases more
efficiently, and convict more accused, we are sure the laws would then work and
exemplary punishment would deter criminals.”). One author went so far as to

122

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 22.107

lead of their Supreme Court, begin to apply the laws rigorously and
demand palpable action from state officials, the law may begin to
cause pause amongst those who perpetuate the devadasi system.
2.

Judges Should Create Social Pressure Through Their Rulings
One of the largest obstacles facing those who want to eradicate the devadasi system is that there seems to be an implicit acceptance, almost in the form of an unspoken law, among those closest
to the practice that allows it to perpetuate. Combatting that social
acceptance is likely the first, and most important, fight for opponents of the practice.79
For their part, judges have the ability to alter society’s values
based on their rulings, especially when those rulings are in line with
the national will following a watershed moment, such as, the 2012
Delhi incident. Indian judges would do well to augment, through
their decisions and underlying rationale, the already existing social
pressure against the practice. The Indian Supreme Court, again,
provides a strong exemplar. In its order to the Karnataka Chief
Secretary, the Supreme Court noted that the devadasi tradition was
a “national shame,” and required that the Karnataka government
provide guidelines on how it was going to curb the practice.80 The
Supreme Court, by expressing “shock over the proposed dedication of hundreds of Dalit girls as Devadasis”81 sent a clear message
to not only the Karnataka government, but also to individuals in
and around the practice, that social mores are changing. While it
is difficult to empirically measure the effect of a judge’s opinion on
societal values, the fact that numerous NGOs and governmental actors cite to such rulings is proof that they do have some significance
when applied to a populace’s collective consciousness.
V. Conclusion
The devadasi tradition, once an institution that bestowed honor on women who were chosen to take part, has devolved into a
say that the Indian judicial system does nothing more to prove “over and over
the axiom that justice delayed is justice denied.” See Sankaran, supra note 73.
79
The position that social, rather than legal, change is the most effective
route is a popular one. This is particularly true given that India is wrought with
corruption and that Indians have “a regrettable tendency to treat laws as mere
suggestions, like worthy advice from a grandmother—to be followed in theory
and ignored in practice.” See Sankaran, supra note 73.
80
See Supreme Court Asks Karnataka Chief Secretary to Take Steps to Stop
‘Devadasi’ System, supra note 56.
81
Supreme Court Shocked by Ritual Sex Slavery in India, Dalit Freedom
Network UK, http://www.dfn.org.uk/news/archive/415-supreme-court-on-devadasi (last visited Dec. 5, 2014).

2015]

The Devadasi System

123

system of institutionalized sexual exploitation and prostitution of
young, lower-caste girls.82 Although the practice is no longer as
prevalent as it once was, thanks in large part to being prohibited
by both domestic and international law, thousands of girls are still
dedicated to the practice on a yearly basis for economic, religious,
and social reasons. Perhaps even more problematic, many of the
dedicated girls do not see participation in the practice in a negative
way since “[f]or the very poor, and the very pious, the devadasi system can still be seen as providing a way out of poverty while gaining
access to the blessings of the gods, the two things that the most
impoverished crave.”83
Despite the continued existence of the practice, the advent
of India’s sexual violence revolution is offering judges an opportunity to help ring in the death knell of the devadasi institution. In
particular, this paper argues that judges should take two steps: first,
ensure that the newly-enacted laws are vigorously applied, and second, use their position of influence to create social pressure to end
the practice. While these solutions are not comprehensive, they are
simple and effective steps that judges can take to end the devadasi
practice—an institution that continues to subject thousands of girls,
as young as five or six, annually to a lifetime of sexual exploitation
and prostitution.

See Genesis of the Devadasi System in India: Trafficking of Girls and
Women By Religious And Social Sanction, the Network Univ., http://www.
netuni.nl/courses/library/0cb66d9bfeafc5f30f2dddca5/genesis_of_the_ devadasi_system_in_indi1.doc (“According to Chakresh Jain, ‘Present-day devadasis
are not the descendants of courtesans, nor are they proficient in any arts. . . . The
only art they are conversant in is the art of submitting to any man who desires
them and is willing to pay for their favours.’”).
83
See Dalrymple, supra note 14.
82

