TRAUMA ABOUNDS:
A Case for Trauma-Informed Lawyering
Claudia Peña*
. . . and when we speak we are afraid
our words will not be heard
nor welcomed
but when we are silent
we are still afraid
So it is better to speak
remembering
we were never meant to survive
—Audre Lorde1

In September 2018, I walked through the halls of the school
where I teach and observed as students, staff, and faculty alike
watched the Kavanaugh confirmation hearing. Some silently
looked on in shock. Others laughed nervously, probably wondering if what they were watching was actually real. Still others had
tears streaming down their faces as they watched, in horror, what
they felt was a desecration to the legal institution they cherished.
As a survivor myself, I assumed that many were reliving their own
traumas attached to sexual assault and feeling keenly the humiliation of not being believed or having had their ordeals belittled for
the personal gain of others.
*
Claudia Peña is lecturer at law at UCLA School of Law and a faculty member of the UCLA Gender Studies Department. She is cofounder of
­Repair, an organization based in Los Angeles that addresses how systems of oppression and exploitation, such as racism, traumatize and disable communities.
She provides CLE for nonprofits, government agencies and private firms on
trauma-informed lawyering, and teaches advocates how to address their own
secondary trauma. She has testified at Senate hearings with regard to sex trafficking and the traumatizing effects of current systems in place. She previously
directed the California Civil Rights Coalition for 5 years where she focused on
voting rights, racial justice, equal opportunity and progressive taxation. Peña
earned her B.A. at Mills College in Sociology and her J.D. at UCLA School
of Law, where she specialized in the Epstein Program in Public Interest Law
and Policy and Critical Race Studies. Her work has been published in California Lawyer, Non-Profit Quarterly, and Georgetown Journal of Modern Critical
Race Perspectives.
1. Audre Lorde, The Black Unicorn: Poems 31 (W. W. Norton & Co.
Inc., 1st ed. 1978).
© 2019 Claudia Peña. All rights reserved.

7

8

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

Vol. 26.7

Events that involve extreme helplessness, fear, humiliation,
instability, insecurity, injury, violation, grief, or danger can cause
trauma, though this list is not exhaustive. Trauma results from an
experience that breaks past normal coping and defense mechanisms. I was recently craft-making at my mother’s house. I used an
X-Acto knife on a self-healing mat. The knife I used had a sharp
blade, and the mat was worn and had seen better days. It had dozens of scrapes and scratches and when I cut, it sliced right through
the mat and marked my mother’s table. If you are not an avid
craftmaker, you may not know that the blade should not have cut
through the mat. It’s referred to as a self-healing mat because the
cuts generally close up as soon as the blade slides through. While
my mom and I laughed about the fact that I had destroyed her tool,
I thought about the comparison to trauma.
Our psychological defenses can withstand a certain amount of
difficulties, obstacles, and painful experiences. Human beings live in
a world where plenty of sad, disappointing, and appalling incidents
take place all the time. And we don’t walk around traumatized all
the time because we are self-healing mats. Our bodies have evolved
to heal themselves as much as possible, and our psyches have all sorts
of tools to tolerate trials and pain. As for self-healing mats, if the mat
is already weakened from overuse; or if you use something strong
enough to cut through the mat, such as a machete or butcher knife; or
if you happen to hit the mat in some particularly vulnerable spot and
it just kind of hacks off; then a permanent cut is the result. Like the
mats, if a person has already confronted so much hardship that they
are vulnerable just by way of having faced too much—or if something particularly serious occurs, such as robbery, rape, or sudden
homelessness—then trauma might result. A group of people could
experience the same fire or flood and you might find that nine of ten
were able to withstand the tragedy, but one person might end up really traumatized because it was something they’d always feared. This
is because whether or not someone experiences trauma depends on
countless factors and differs from person to person.
Trauma manifests in myriad ways and can last a day, a year, or a
lifetime. It’s always both psychological and physical: body and mind
are inseparable. A physical trauma (such as the loss of a limb) will
have psychological impacts; and emotional trauma (such as intimate
partner abuse) will lead to physical manifestations in the body. Trauma can lead to varying effects such as hopelessness, inability to recall,
loss of sleep, distrustfulness, disassociation, difficulty concentrating,
exaggerated startle response, hyper- or hypoarousal, irritability, outbursts of anger, hypervigilance, or efforts to avoid any reminders of

2019

Trauma Abounds

9

the traumatic event. Long-term, unaddressed trauma is often at the
root of abuse, neglect, substance abuse, reckless behavior, and aggression. Though it is not true that people suffering from trauma will all
behave in these ways, it is true that people who behave in these manners often have untreated trauma. So understanding trauma, how it
manifests, and strategies to work with people who have been traumatized are essential to a healthy society.
One of the most harmful things that can happen to someone who
has been traumatized are experiences of disempowerment. Much of
trauma stems from a feeling of helplessness; so situations where someone is or feels powerless can provoke memories of the traumatic event
causing them to have flashbacks, disassociate, become anxious or nervous, break out into a sweat, or experience various other reactions.
This is why when I train practitioners to use trauma-informed practices, much of the client engagement centers around empowerment of
the client. An empowered client is more dependable, more open, and
more cooperative. Thus an attorney is more likely to succeed in her
case when she has her client’s trust. Similarly, when I teach, I create
a classroom environment where my students are empowered because
they are then more open, more trusting, and more willing to speak
their minds, which in turn allows them to learn more. And because
my sole goal in teaching is for my students to learn, I am more successful at teaching when they are empowered.
When students, women, and survivors everywhere watched
the Kavanaugh confirmation hearings, many felt profoundly disempowered. Given that Dr. Blasey Ford was telling the truth about
the assault she experienced at the hands of Brett Kavanaugh and
his friends, it was especially difficult to watch Senator after Senator ingratiate themself so much to Kavanaugh and even apologize
to him for what he and his family were facing.2 Instead of facing
consequences, instead of being investigated, and instead of being
denied one of the highest honors paid to any American citizen, we
all watched as the Republicans on the Senate Judiciary Committee made it clear the assault of Dr. Blasey Ford held no weight in
2. Some have pointed to the criminal law standards of innocent until
proven guilty and “beyond a reasonable doubt.” Adhering to both of these still
leads me to the conclusion that Brett Kavanaugh assaulted Dr. Christine Blasey
Ford when they were teenagers. Dr. Blasey Ford was a very credible witness
with insufficient reason to lie. Some have said she had enough reason to lie because she wanted to curtail Kavanaugh’s prospects of serving on the Supreme
Court of the United States. This is similar to accusations such as, “We never
went to the moon. The government lied about it because it wanted to seem
strong in the face of the Cold War.” Some naysayer arguments are just silly and
frankly nonstarters. This is one of them. Many articles have explicitly spelled
out why it’s clear that Dr. Blasey Ford is telling the truth, so I will not do so now.

10

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

Vol. 26.7

determining whether or not to confirm Kavanaugh to the Supreme
Court. Much like the Judiciary Committee proceedings of 1991,
where Anita Hill relayed that Clarence Thomas sexually harassed
her while they worked together at the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, the Senators sought to protect the nominee of
their choice despite the allegations.3 The rules, written and unwritten, for how a Supreme Court Justice is chosen and confirmed do
not contemplate the experiences of women vis-à-vis the inappropriate and/or illegal behavior of the nominee. Survivors and their
allies watching felt helpless because they knew their voices, concerns, and experiences did not seem to matter to the men who made
up the majority of the Judiciary Committee.
The video of Ana María Archila and Maria Gallagher imploring Senator Jeff Flake, while he was in an elevator, to rethink his
position is a prime example of the impact of the decisionmaking process on survivors everywhere.4 The women approached Flake before
he voted to move the nomination through the committee. They
outed themselves as survivors, which they had never done up until a
few days before the confrontation with Flake. They felt compelled to
speak because they saw themselves in Dr. Ford. In the video, Gallagher says, “I was sexually assaulted and nobody believed me. I didn’t
tell anyone, and you’re telling all women that they don’t matter, that
they should just stay quiet because, if they tell you what happened
to them, you are going to ignore them. That’s what happened to me,
and that’s what you are telling all women in America, that they don’t
matter. They should just keep it to themselves because if they have
told the truth, you’re just going to help that man to power anyway.”
Sexual assault is one of the most unreported crimes. Three
out of every four incidents are not reported.5 Though there are
various reasons for this, one of the main considerations is that the
survivor knows they will not be believed. And not being believed is
so painful that it is determined to be not worth the risk. There is not
much to be gained from sharing about such painful events, especially since victim-blaming/shaming is so common and accountability is
so rare. Those who commit sexual assault have always relied on the
3. Anita Hill is an attorney and serves as Professor at Brandeis
University.
4. David Morgan, Woman Who Confronted Jeff Flake on Elevator: We
Connected Because He’s a Father, I’m a Mother, CBS News (Oct. 8, 2018),
https://www.cbsnews.com/news/ana-maria-achila-on-elevator-confrontationwith-jeff-flake-he-and-i-connected-because-he-is-a-father-i-am-a-mother
[https://perma.cc/Q7B7-LZCA].
5. RAINN, The Criminal Justice System: Statistics, https://www.rainn.
org/statistics/criminal-justice-system [https://perma.cc/4NK2-QLMR].

2019

Trauma Abounds

11

silence of their victims and the complicity of those who love them.
This is what Archila and Gallagher refer to when they accuse Flake
and his fellow Senators of sending the message to survivors everywhere that their assault doesn’t matter.
Lest some confuse the protesters’ arguments, they were not
saying that Kavanaugh, or anyone else who has been accused of sexual assault, should never work again or be given any opportunities.
The crux of the issue is that instead of any form of accountability,
Kavanaugh would be given the highest honor in the legal field: a seat
on the Supreme Court of the United States. Archila is heard saying:
Do you think that he’s able to hold the pain of this country
and repair it? That is the work of justice. The way that justice
works is you recognize hurt, you take responsibility for it and
then you begin to repair it. You are allowing someone who is
unwilling to take responsibility for his own actions and willing
to hold the harm he has done to one woman, actually three
women, and not repair it. You are allowing someone who is
unwilling to take responsibility for his own actions to sit in the
highest court of the country and to have the role of repairing
the harm that has been done in this country to many people.

This lack of accountability caused further harm to survivors
everywhere, including women, men, and nonbinary, gender nonconforming, and intersex individuals. It deepened and further entrenched
the idea that perpetrators must only vehemently deny their actions
and those in power, especially members of their own in-group, will
loudly apologize to them for the inconvenience of having the past
dredged up. The more privilege one has, the more defended he will
be by others who share or aspire towards that privilege. Brett Kavanaugh, as a straight White man from an upper middle class family,
educated at private schools, had no shortage of defenders in the allWhite cast of men who serve as the Republican members of the
Senate Judiciary Committee. He thus faced zero accountability.
Regardless of the #MeToo moment that stole headlines in 2017–18, a
few fallen heroes does not a changed culture make. The Kavanaugh
confirmation to the Supreme Court is evidence of this. And the lack
of accountability was painful to all the survivors who have experienced the same absence of any kind of justice.
In 2014, I accompanied a dear friend—let’s call her Selena—
to downtown Los Angeles to secure a “civil harassment restraining
order” against the man who raped her. We’ll call him Matt. As go
the statistics, he was a colleague of hers.6 Selena had known Matt
6. In eight out of ten cases of rape, the victim knew the person who
sexually assaulted them. Nat’l Sexual Violence Res. Ctr., Statistics
About Sexual Violence (2015), https://www.nsvrc.org/sites/default/files/

12

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

Vol. 26.7

for years: he was supposed to be a friend. I remember speaking to
her the day afterwards. She was so shaken up, so rattled. And this
was a woman who does not suffer fools easily, and who has always
insisted on being heard and is quick to defend herself, and punch
back when need be. But that day . . . that day was different. Always
articulate, Selena could barely speak. She was a wreck.
Despite the potential fallout, she courageously pursued every
avenue of protection. Understandably, Selena was weary of Matt,
worried that he would try to hurt her again because she’d reported the incident to their employer and to the police. She secured a
temporary restraining order. When the hearing for the civil harassment restraining order (a longer-term restraining order) came up,
neither Matt nor Selena had an attorney. The judge, of his own
volition, said to Matt, “The consequences for you are dire; I am
going to reschedule this hearing so that you can go find yourself
an attorney to defend you.” Upon landing on a new date, Selena
said, “Your honor, I have a job interview that day. Matt and I work
together and I’m trying to keep myself safe by finding a new job.”
The judge responded that her job interview was not something he
could accommodate. It was striking because he’d made such effort
to protect Matt but felt disinclined to assist Selena in trying to protect herself. Maybe the difference in accommodation was the result
of his bias in favor of men over women, or White over Latina, or
accused over accuser, or maybe some combination of the three. As
the judge was a White man—though it’s not a foregone conclusion
that everyone acts on their in-group bias—it is safe to theorize that
the judge saw himself in Matt, a fellow White man, and wanted to
help him at the expense of Selena’s understanding of her safety.
On the morning of the rescheduled hearing for the restraining
order, we received the news that the District Attorney had decided
to drop the rape charges against Matt. The District Attorney called
Selena and said, “We all believe this happened. You are a very credible witness. But the supervisor says we’ll have a tough time with
the jury and reasonable doubt because you knew him and it was at
your house. We’re really sorry.” It’s just more confirmation that the
criminal justice system is not set up to facilitate safety and security for victims (much less rehabilitation for those who cause harm)
and why so many vulnerable communities, including communities
of color, immigrants, LGBTQI people, people with disabilities, the
working class, and survivors choose not to pursue criminal charges.7
publications_nsvrc_factsheet_media-packet_statistics-about-sexual-violence_0.pdf.
7.
See generally Mariame Kaba, Justice, in The Feminist Utopia Project:

2019

Trauma Abounds

13

Upon finishing that phone call, we walked into the courtroom. The
hearing began with Selena asking for a continuance. She told the
judge she’d just learned about the District Attorney’s decision, and
that information changed the evidence she planned on presenting
to secure the restraining order. She requested a few more days to
secure the services of an attorney. The same judge who insisted on
a continuance so that Matt could secure legal representation denied
Selena any extra time and instead plunged into questioning. He
promptly asked if she and Matt had dated. Selena responded with
a resounding “No,” and Matt stayed silent. After making the typical
remark about it being his word against hers, the judge asked Selena
what happened. She shared her story—Selena was articulate and
emotional, crying through many of her words but still capable of
compelling testimony. After she spoke, Matt’s attorney interjected
to remind the judge that the District Attorney had dropped charges,
so clearly, “nothing had happened.” Evidently finally moved by
Selena’s recollection of her experience, the judge replied sternly,
“Look at her. Do you see her? I am inclined to believe her. The
District Attorney drops charges for all kinds of reasons and it does
not mean that nothing happened. I believe this happened.” Unfortunately, the judge still felt as if his hands were tied by the dropped
charges and did not grant the restraining order despite finding Selena credible. With the District Attorney having dropped the charges,
the judge felt as if he needed more than Selena’s honest statements.
As Matt exited, the judge stopped us and somewhat apologized. I
can’t be sure, but it seemed he regretted some of his earlier decisions and maybe some of his behavior towards Selena. But by then,
it was certainly too little, too late. The damage was already done.
And another assault went unaccounted for.
Looking back, it seemed maybe the judge had taken the position
early on that Selena was a woman who probably wanted to date this
guy, had been rejected, and now here she was accusing an innocent
guy of rape. Though we know the number of “false reports” is somewhere between two and ten percent, this type of thinking seems to be
prevalent.8 Coupled with the fact that only 23 percent of incidents of
rape and sexual assault were reported to the police in 2016 according
to the National Crime Victimization Survey,9 it becomes obvious why
this is such a deeply rooted, controversial, and fraught issue.
Fifty-Seven Visions of a Wildly Better Future 80 (Alexandra Brodsky &
Rachel Kauder Nalebuff eds., 2015).
8. Nat’l Sexual Violence Res. Ctr., False Reporting (2012), https://
www.nsvrc.org/sites/default/files/Publications_NSVRC_Overview_False-­
Reporting.pdf.
9. Rachel Morgan & Jennifer L. Truman, Criminal Victimization,

14

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

Vol. 26.7

In both of these situations—the Kavanaugh confirmation process and Selena’s restraining order hearing—it is unmistakable how
much our field would benefit from trauma-informed practices. It is
perhaps an unfair assumption, but I will go out on a limb and state
that everyone wants the world to be better and would like to play
a role in improving society. If that is true, then the desire to learn
trauma-informed practices should be universal. No ideological
or political divide is necessary. So long as one desires that people
succeed and that they have access to opportunity and resources in
order offer their best to the world, then understanding trauma and
being conscious of its impacts should be part of our toolkit.
For example, when people hear about posttraumatic stress
disorder (PTSD), they generally imagine male combat veterans. In
reality, women tend to experience PTSD at twice the rates of men
because women who are raped have a higher chance of ending up
with it and it lasts longer.10 This is, of course, to say nothing of women
who have been raped and are also veterans. Though decidedly
understudied, transgender people seem to be disproportionately
represented in PTSD statistics.11 There are various theories as to
why this is true, but the fact that transgender individuals tend to
experience sexual assault at higher rates is certainly relevant.
PTSD is generally characterized by four primary symptoms.
These are: (1) flashbacks or persistent intrusive thoughts about the
traumatic event; (2) avoidance of anything related to the event e.g.
music, pictures, people, locations etc.; (3) negative thoughts leading
to behaviors such as emotional numbing, addiction, detachment or
disassociation; (4) increased or decreased arousal or reactivity, such
as hyper- or hypovigilance, exaggerated startle response, irritability
or outbursts of anger. Though not all trauma leads to diagnosable PTSD, most people who are traumatized will experience some
aspect of the symptoms listed above. And this is why trauma-informed practices should be an essential component of teaching the
law (or teaching anything) and practicing the law. Understanding
these manifestations of trauma and planning accordingly makes it
so we may be more successful in our teaching endeavors or our ethical commitments to practice the law to the best of our ability.
2017 (2018), https://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/cv17.pdf. In 2017, the number
rose to 40 percent.
10. David F. Tolin & Edna B. Foa, Sex Differences in Trauma and Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: A Quantitative Review Of 25 Years Of Research, 132
Psychol. Bulletin 959 (2006).
11. Sari L. Reisner et al., Discriminatory Experiences Associated with
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Symptoms Among Transgender Adults, 63 J.
Counseling Psychol. 509 (2016).

2019

Trauma Abounds

15

Throughout Kavanaugh’s confirmation process, students at
various law school campuses, including in the San Francisco Bay
Area, New York, and Los Angeles demanded to hear from their
faculty and administrations with regard to the Senate Judiciary
Committee hearings. It is my understanding that students were disappointed with the lack of proactive engagement to help them deal
with the distress and confusion regarding the hearings and felt abandoned by the leadership at their institutions. If trauma-informed
practices were part of legal training, faculty and administrators
alike would have been better prepared to offer up the space and
language necessary to accommodate people who have been traumatized and were suffering through the confirmation proceedings,
whether from PTSD or otherwise.
As professors, our goal is to reach and teach every single one of
our students. Often, our pedagogy has two focuses: There are the specifics of the content of the course and, just as importantly, we strive to
offer guidance regarding a particular level of professionalism, ethics,
and responsibility. If students matriculate through our classes and
are able to offer more good to their communities, then we have succeeded. I imagine it is important to all my colleagues to reach each
student. However, if we do not engage in trauma-informed practices
in spaces such as in educational institutions, we run the risk of ‘losing’
the student. By losing, I mean the student might dissociate, or shut
off, or feel alienated enough from the professor that they do not gain
whatever knowledge was meant to be imparted. They might disengage from the lessons or from the class altogether.
Similarly, if an attorney does not use trauma-informed practices, she runs the risk of alienating her client. An alienated client is
generally less forthcoming, less cooperative, and less dependable. If
something an attorney does puts this much strain on the client, then
it becomes impossible to fulfill the duty of zealous representation.
And within our legal institutions, the need is the same. To the extent
that we care about seeking out truth and serving justice, this cannot
be accomplished without trauma-informed practices. It is impossible
for judges to suss out the truth if a witness does not feel empowered
to share that truth, or if they’ve become so alienated from the process
that they are no longer present or contributing to the proceedings, or
if the judge’s own bias impedes their ability to offer a fair hearing.

Conclusion
Legal practitioners represent and serve people during some
of the most vulnerable times of their life. Divorce, foreclosure,
bankruptcy, criminal allegations, removal proceedings, and personal

16

UCLA WOMEN’S LAW JOURNAL

Vol. 26.7

injury are just a few scenarios where clients or litigants are likely
to face great upheaval in their lives and the chances of experiencing trauma are magnified. On top of that, sometimes our clients
and other involved parties are traumatized from incidents wholly
unrelated to the legal issue at hand, and yet it is still necessary to
strategize with the trauma in mind. Other professions that serve
vulnerable clients, such as medical providers, social workers, and
psychologists, receive at least some trauma-informed care training.
It is high time that the legal profession incorporates trauma-informed practices into its training as well.
Some may take the position that being trauma-informed
is unnecessary or overly sensitive and that it is not within the job
description for a law professor or legal practitioner to “coddle” those
who have been traumatized. To that I would say that trauma-informed practices can only help, not hurt, any given situation. When
the debate of climate change comes up in my family, we agree that
environmentally friendly practices are good whether one believes in
climate change or not. It is good to not be wasteful; it is good to recycle; and it is good to protect the earth’s finite resources. Regardless of
whether one believes the impacts of trauma are real, the practices are
helpful and should be used anyway. What harm can come from being
more thoughtful and diligent, or compassionate and empathetic? To
reiterate, to the extent we want to offer our best as professors of law
or practitioners of the law, we must employ strategies that are cognizant of the effects of trauma. If we do not, we are doing a disservice
to a portion of the population of would-be lawyers and certainly not
zealously representing our clients or the people.
The only way to bear the overwhelming pain of oppression is
by telling, in all its detail, in the presence of witnesses and in
a context of resistance, how unbearable it is. If we attempt to
craft resistance without understanding this task, we are collectively vulnerable to all the errors of judgment that unresolved
trauma generates in individuals. It is part of our task as revolutionary people, people who want deep-rooted, radical change,
to be as whole as it is possible for us to be. This can only be
done if we face the reality of what oppression really means in
our lives, not as abstract systems subject to analysis, but as an
avalanche of traumas leaving a wake of devastation in the lives
of real people who nevertheless remain human, unquenchable,
complex and full of possibility.
—Aurora Levins Morales, Medicine Stories: History, Culture
and the Politics of Integrity12
12. Aurora Levins Morales, Medicine Stories: History, Culture and
the Politics of Integrity (1999).

